What branch of government does the prime minister lead?
What group is the prime minister usually in charge of?
In some political models like semi-presidential systems, what does the prime minister manage?
What is a parliamentary model on which other systems have been based?
What kind of role is the head of state in Westminster-based parliamentary governments?
What is a central duty of the prime minister?
What is it called when a monarch has a share of executive powers?
Using royal prerogative does not require the consent of which body?
What are two other job titles of the Prime Minister of the  UK?
In addition to being Prime Minister, what other role did Winston Churchill serve during World War II?
When was the title of prime minister first used?
Who coined the term prime minister?
What country did Richelieu serve as prime minister for?
Who started a tradition of naming the head ministers something other than prime minister?
When did the modern usage of prime minister come into being?
Who was referenced as prime minister in a negative manner when the term was first used in its modern sense?
Who occupied the role that would later become prime minister under Henry VIII?
Who held the equivalent of the post of prime minister under Queen Anne?
Who served as the head minister under Charles II?
From whom did ministers derive their power?
Who was responsible for naming people to serve in the cabinet?
Who are the two ministers used by Queen Anne simultaneously?
Who was exiled when he lost the favor of the monarch?
What 1688 event helped the parliament solidy its power against the monarch?
What 1689 law contributed to parliament's growing power?
What body was incorporated into the government as a result of the Bill of Rights?
The reign of which king was a turning point in the growth of the position of prime minister?
In what year did Queen Anne die?
Where was George I's home?
For how long did Robert Walpole serve as prime minister?
What party did Walpole belong to?
What concept took shape during Walpole's tenure as prime minister?
What would a minister have to do if he did not publicly support a cabinet policy?
Who is another prime minister who reiterated the principles of cabinet solidarity?
Aside from Walpole, who else denied that there was no such thing as the prime minister?
Which kings tried to get power back to the monarchy?
During whose government did prime minister first see use on official state documents?
When was the position of prime minister finally formalized?
In the U.S. and governments modeled on it, who holds executive power?
Which non-elected official has held the longest term as prime minister?
When did Khalifa first take the post of prime minister?
What country does Khalifah serve for as prime minister?
Greece, Finland, Romania and Turkey use what kind of government?
In whic type of government is the leader elected?
What is the term for the head of China's government?
What is another name for the Republic of China?
Whose consent is not required for the Taiwanese premier to take office?
What is the term for a situation in which the president and prime minister come from different political parties?
What can the French parliament cause in order to oust the prime minister?
Which constitution details the role and abilities of the prime minister?
What other considerations are included in the constitution of Bangladesh as regards the prime minister?
What is directly above the premier in the People's Republic of China?
What is the pinyin form of premier?
Which law first referred to the prime minister in Canada?
When was the Constitution Act passed?
The Constitution Act mentions the prime minister in the context of which kinds of other ministers?
What document details the role and abilities given to the prime minister of the Czech Republic?
When was prime minister first mentioned in a government document in the UK?
Who was the last prime minister to serve simultaneously as Chancellor of the Exchequer?
When did Balfour last hold the titles of prime minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer?
Which prime minister was appointed only one time?
When was Thatcher appointed prime minister?
When did Thatcher last hold power?
What did Margaret Thatcher reconfigure following each general election?
What is the name of the prime ministerial position in Ireland?
From where is the Irish prime minister usually selected?
When is the Irish Taoiseach renominated?
Most parliamentary governments need to have the support of what governmental body?
Which political division does not often utilize its power, if it has any?
What kind of referendum can the lower house of parliament take against the government?
Who can put a stop the parliamentary attempts at dissovling itself in some areas?
If the head of state prevents the dissolution of parliament, what needs to happen?
In contemporary parliamentary governments, which official is usually in charge of asking parliament to dissolve?
When was the convention of prime ministers initiating the dissolution of parliament started?
In Ireland, when was the power to dissolve parliament assigned to the prime minister?
The 1922 Irish Free State Constitution previously gave what body the power to dissolve parliament?
What was the Executive Council an alternate name for?
What process signals the need for the prime minister to resign in Australia?
What is the Russian term for prime minister?
What is the Israeli term for prime minister?
What is the term used in spain for prime minister?
What is the Irish term for prime minister?
What is the Italian term for the prime minister?
What is the native term for prime minister in Scandinavia?
What is a term that is used to mean prime minister?
Which countries use the term chancellor to denote the head of government?
What is the head of Monaco's government called?
What is the term for the highest position in government in Vatican City?
What is the head of Iran's government called?
In what kinds of nations can the head of government attain the title of Excellency?
What honorific title can be given to prime ministers in commonwealth nations?
What are British prime ministers part of that grants them the title Right Honourable?
What is an example of a country where prime ministers can be called Right Honourable solely because of their position?
What kind of government is in operation in the United Kingdom?
What are the heads of government in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland called?
What is the Indian term for Prime Minister?
What is the term for prime minister in Pakistan?
What does Wazir-e-Azam mean in English?
What is the head of government's office called in Canada?
What is the head of government's office called in the UK?
What's a common abbreviation for the term institute of technology?
In what century did the term polytechnic first show up?
What school founded in 1794 first used a form of the word polytechnic in its name?
What language does the French word polytechnique come from?
What word means the same thing as "institute of technology"?
What was the first institute of technology in the world?
What war led to the increased popularity of institutes of technology and polytechnics?
What was the founding name of the Braunschweig University of Technology?
In what year was the École Polytechnique founded?
What kind of institutions do countries like Germany and Switzerland consider institutes of technology to be?
In what year were polytechnics in the UK given the university designation?
What is the name of the Royal Polytechnic Institution now?
What street is the University of Westminster on?
What term was used in some countries to describe select universities that focus on technological education in applied science and engineering?
What name did some universities switch to in the 1990s for marketing purposes?
What system were institutes of technology a part of during the seventies, eighties, and early nineties?
What's the four-letter abbreviation for technically minded technical and further education institutes?
What is the new name of the Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE?
TAFE Tasmania started a three-year restructuring in what year?
In Australia, how many universities are recognized as Universities of Technology?
What's the German word for a tertiary education institution?
In addition to Bachelor's degrees, what other kind of degree can one earn from a Fachhochschule?
What term is used in Belgium and the Netherlands to refer to an institution like a German Fachhochschule?
What term refers to the process that a hogeschool undergoes before it's able to award Master's degrees?
How many institutes of technology in the Netherlands have converted into full-fledged universities in the past few decades?
How many Technical Universities are there in the Netherlands today?
What country has Institutes of Technology/Polytechnic Institutes from which students can earn certificates, diplomas, and degrees?
What are polytechnic divisions of national universities called in Canada?
In what city is the École Polytechnique de Montréal located?
In addition to private equity and industry sources, what's a third source of research funding for institutions of higher learning in Canada?
What is Canada's national alliance of 11 research-focused schools called?
What kind of projects does Polytechnics Canada sponsor that can lead to technology commercialization?
In what year was the Imperial Tientsin University founded in China?
What was the first university to offer courses in liberal arts?
What portion of China's elite universities still have a primary polytechnical focus today?
What year did Croatia pass a law regarding polytechnic education?
What institution is in charge of tracking volcanic activity in the Galápagos Islands?
What observatory is the National Observatory of Ecuador?
What school oversees the Quito Astronomical Observatory?
When was the Quito Astronomical Observatory founded?
EPN's Nuclear Science Department is among how many of its kind in Ecuador?
If the mission is achieved, professionals will apply what they've learned to what goal?
MIT raised money to cover tuition, room and board for what number of students?
What's the equivalent of Universities of Technology in French-speaking areas?
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. (Tech.) degree before the Bologna Process?
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. from a traditional university prior to the Bologna Process?
In what country are polytechnic schools designated uniquely from academic universities?
What word means polytechnic school in Finnish?
What's the Swedish word for a polytechnic school?
Universities that encompass several engineering schools provide curricula in sciences and what other field?
What are an institute of technology called in France?
What's the three-letter acronym for institut universitaire de technologie?
What's the term in German for what those in French-speaking Switzerland call haute école specialisée?
In Eastern Europe, what is the word for an institute of technology?
What century in France's history included the French École polytechnique that influenced education systems in other countries?
What term in Brasil and Spain refers to a polytechnic institute?
Fachhochschulen first came about in the early years of what decade?
Fachhochschulen favor an education in what, as opposed to research?
In addition to technology, Fachhochschulen offer courses in social science, medicine, design, and what other discipline?
What's the abbreviation for a Technische Universität?
What's the main focus of a Technische Universität?
Which department's faculty can be associated with university hospitals?
How many Technische Universitäten make up the TU9 German Institutes of Technology?
How many institutes of technology are there in Germany?
What's the approximate number of students in Germany who are enrolled in a university of technology?
Which German state has the highest ratio of universities of technology to standard universities?
What's the joint project of TU Clausthal, TU Braunschweig, and the University of Hanover called?
What's the name of the Act that changed how Greek public institutes of technology were designated?
What was the very first polytechnic school in Hong Kong?
What was the original name of Hong Kong Polytechnic?
In what year was the City Polytechnic of Hong Kong founded?
What Hong Kong university was created in 1991?
When did the two polytechnic schools in Hong Kong receive status as universities?
What kind of mining did the world's first institute of technology prepare students for?
What's the founding year of the first institute of technology ever?
Who established the Berg-Schola?
How many private institutes of technology are there in India?
How many government-affiliated institutes of technology are there in India?
What organization oversees India's technical education institutions?
What's the name of the diploma awarded in India for technical or vocational coursework?
How many government-owned public institutes of technology does Indonesia have?
Rather than four-year Bachelor's degrees, Politeknik offer a diploma after how many years?
What was the original name of Ireland's Institute of Technology system?
What Irish institute of technology evolved independently of the Regional Technical College System?
What term in higher education refers to technical universities that award engineering degrees?
Traditionally, how many Politecnici were there?
What city houses the headquarters of the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia?
What college was the forerunner for the engineering faculty at the University of Tokyo?
What area of discipline do Japan's institutes of technology specialize in?
What country has operated polytechnic institutes for nearly 44 years?
What international organization partnered with Malaysia's Ministry of Education in 1969?
In what city in the state of Perak is the Politeknik Ungku Omar located?
How many polytechnic institutes does Malaysia have now?
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2009?
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2012?
What's the name of Mauritius's sole technical university?
What's the focus of Mauritius's University of Technology's specialized mission?
What country considers their polytechnics, universities, and colleges state-owned institutions?
What does UCOL stand for?
In what year was the Education Act originally passed in New Zealand?
What school did Massey University combine with?
In what decade did New Zealand's tertiary education institutions begin consolidation?
What school considered a merger with Waikato Institute of Technology that was later abandoned?
What island was Waiarapa Polytechnic located on before it merged with UCOL?
What's the only polytechnic school in New Zealand to be designated a university?
In Pakistan, a student's tests in what grade determine their admission to a diploma program?
What are people being trained for, mainly, in Pakistan's polytechnic institutes?
How many years does it usually take to earn a diploma from polytechnic schools in Pakistan?
What two-letter abbreviation is used for undergraduate engineering  courses?
What's Pakistan's program called that's comparable to the British A Level?
What word do they use in Poland for an institute of technology?
What is the Portuguese word for the short-cycle degrees awarded prior to 1988?
What process was instituted in 2007 that brought Master's degrees to the polytechnic education system?
What's the name of Singapore's centralized institute that students can attend before university?
How many polytechnics are there in Singapore?
How many years of study would it take to obtain a degree from a polytechnic in Singapore?
What queen set up the Banská Akadémia?
What year was the Banská Akadémia founded?
The Banská Akadémia was originally intended for training workers in what two precious metals?
What year did teaching start at the Banská Akadémia?
What are the university buildings still standing at the Banská Akadémia used for now?
What are polytechnics called in South Africa?
What year did Technikons gain the ability to give out technology degrees?
When did Technikons start being integrated with traditional South African universities?
Most institutes of technology in Thailand were born out of what other type of institutions?
What type of degree were Thailand's technical colleges historically not allowed to confer?
What's the new name of Pathumwan Technical School?
What did the Thonburi Technology Institute become after its name change?
What was the previous name of Rajamangala University of Technology?
What is the name of Thammasat University's engineering school?
What is Thailand's only government-established and owned institute of technology?
What year was Suranaree University of Technology founded?
What is the name of the best-known private institute of technology in Thailand?
What institute of technology opened in Bursa in 2010?
When Konya Technical University opens, how many total institutes of technology will there be in Turkey and the Ottoman Empire?
What two cities in Turkey acquired institutes of technology in the 1950s?
What year did UK polytechnics start functioning in a binary education system?
What organization validates degrees received from polytechnic schools?
What two-word term does Scotland use to describe their technological universities?
What was the first polytechnic in Britain originally named?
How many Institutes of Science and Technology were affiliated with the University of Wales?
What was the name Loughborough University was known by from 1966 to 1996?
In what decade did colleges of technology gain the University designation?
What act allowed polytechnic schools to become universities?
The Further and Higher Education Act 1992 allows polytechnics to award degrees without what organization's approval?
If a technical institute is affiliated with a local university, what does its designation become?
What century brought the advent of technical schools or technical institutes?
A student would attend a technical institute before a university or polytechnic but after what?
In what year was Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute founded?
Which of the three earliest technological universities was founded most recently, in 1861?
What type of economy was technical education in Venezuela intended to support?
When did Venezuela begin to create institutes of technology?
What city in Venezuela had the first IUT?
Who pioneered using the French system of technological education?
What is used a main source of light for a building during the day?
What kind of effects can natural illumination have on a persons psychological?
Using natural illumination instead of artificial light sources help with what?
Lamps and light fixtures are a form of what?
The use of light to achieve an aesthetic effect is know as?
What can be used a main source of light for a building during the day?
Lamps and light fixtures  are a form of what?
What kind of effects can proper lighting have on a persons psychologically?
What does using natural illumination instead of artificial lighting help with?
What is the used to achieve a practical effect?
What type of fixtures do you use for indoor lighting?
What is considered a key part of interior design?
What can be a intrinsic component of landscaping?
What type of fixtures are used typically used for indoor lighting?
What can be used as a intrinsic component of landscape projects?
When was fluorescent lighting first available?
What type of lighting can be mounted in the ceiling to appear flush?
Peking man kindled fire as early as?
Which type of oily animals where also used as lamps after being threaded with wick?
What is considered the earliest form of artificial lighting?
The hollow worked stones lamps found in Lascaux caves date back how far?
What type of lighting was powered by electricity?
When did gas powered street lights became economically available.
Street lights help reduce?
What can come in a wide variety of styles for various functions?
Functioning as holder a light fixture can provide directed light and avoid?
Luminous efficacy is measure in what unit?
How many Kelvins is daylight measured at?
What has a color temperature around 2800 to 3000 Kelvin?
It can be said that lights with a high color temperature have more energy in what color spectrum?
A lamp with more energy in the yellow and red spectrum are known to be?
A light is classified by intended purpose, what mainly changes its classification?
Who invented track lighting?
What feeds all the fixtures in low voltage tracks instead of each light having a line-to-low voltage transformer.
What  type of lighting uses lights that are hung or clipped to bare metal cables?
How many volts does a track lighting system usually use?
What is a uplight used for ambient lighting?
What is one type of fixture commonly found in offices?
Magnifier lamps are considered what type of lighting? 
When would neon lighting be considered general lighting?
What uses diffuser panels below fluorescent lights?
Normally neon lighting is considered what type of lighting?
What do steps in move theater aisles have for safety markings?
What are the low wattage lamps being replaced with in movie theaters?
What kind of tube are the movie theaters lights enclosed in?
What is used to light walkways at night?
What kind of lights are being designed for energy efficiency?
What kind of light is used to illuminate outdoor playing fields at night?
Extremely bright lights used to deter crime are called?
What type of light would be used illuminate the entrance to a property?
What color are tail lights?
What color are headlamps on a vehicle?
When did automakers start using electroluminescent technology to backlight gauges?
What color are reversing indicator lamps?
What indicates that a driver is intending to change position?
What is the removable and replaceable part of a light fixture?
What does a light bulb convert into electromagnetic radiation?
Huge much light does a 13 W compact fluorescent lamp produce equivalent to a incandescent light bulb.
How many lemuns does a 15 watt fluorescent lamp produce?
What is designing as it applies to built environments?
Would you consider aesthetic elements alone in architectural lighting design?
What is the name of the software sometimes used to help calculate lighting needs in a built environment?
Hand-calculations are based off of what type of data?
What type of factor calculation can be used to find out how much daylight is received in a internal space.
What type of paint tends to absorb light?
What kind of paint makes a room a room look larger and brighter?
What type of study is used to simulate lighting designs?
What is prepared prior to the performance for the lighting operator?
Motion pictures employee the similar lighting techniques as which other form of lighting?
What is the basic SI unit of measurement?
What is the SI unit for lumiance?
What is the CGS unit of lumiance?
What is the amount of useful light emitted from a luminous flux measured in? 
What is a standardized model of human visual brightness?
What is the SI unit of illuminace and luminous emittance?
What does UGR stand for?
What does CCT stand for?
What does CRI stand for?
What metric indicates a lights ability to make object appear natural?
What metric indicates "warmth" or "coolness"?
What does GAI stand for?
The relative separating of object colors illuminated by a light source is known as?
Would a lower GAI mean higher apparent saturation or vividness of object colors?
What is typically used to measure light?
What measures the amount of light entering the eye?
A Daysimeter what type of personal meter?
How many days can the Daysimeter gather for analysis?
What type of light stimulates the circadian system?
What is a basic concept of deciding how much illumination is required for a given task? 
What can help reduce energy and usage cost by providing light only when or where it is needed? 
What type of standard do newer control systems use? 
What is the name of one type of control system used? 
Does a wireless mesh open standard make installation harder?
What sensor controls light with motion sensors? 
What does a passive infrared sensor react to? 
What type of sensor transmits sound above the range of human hearing?
Would you want to use passive infrared sensor in a area requiring 360-degree coverage?
What is the oldest method of interior lighting? 
Daylighting has been proven to have negative effects on people?
What is a form of solid state lighting?
What is the best way to control light emissions of LEDs?
What can cause health effects such headache frequency?
Maximizing the right amount of light at the appropriate time for elderly may help systems of what? 
The human circadian system is entrained to how many hours light-dark pattern?
What happens to the natural carcidan cycle when light-dark patterns are disrupted?
Who documented 23 surgical patients assigned rooms looking out on a natural scene?
Did the patients with natural scenes have longer postoperative hospital stays?
Did patients that have natural scenes require more potent analgesics?
What University was Alision Jing Xu the assistant professor of management at?
What Univerity was Aparna Labroo associated with?
What devised a method where kerosene could be distilled from petroleum?
What year was it discovered that petroleum could be distilled into kerosene? 
What method of lighting have been used since 1820s?
What does CFL stand for?
Are all CFLs suitable for dimming?
How much more power does a standard incandescent bulb use compared to LED?
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?
How much power does a halogen lamp save compared to a standard blub?
What is known as artificial light that is excessive or intrusive?
What causes sharp shadows around buildings? 
In a battlefield does not have natural light what could you use instead? 
The use of what may disclose your own hidden position on a battlefield? 
Modern warfare has seen the increased use of what? 
What can be used by military for targeting?
What has eliminated the need for flares on a battlefield?
What does the CIE stand for?
What does the IESNA stand for? 
Who else publishes along with IESNA? 
What defines photo metric data?
What does IALD stand for?
What does PLDA stand for?
What was the PLDA formerly known as?
Who offers the Lighting Certification Examination? 
What does NCQLP stand for?
Which abbreviation can you append to your name after becoming Lighting Certified?
What other national examinations are available?
What does PLASA stand for? 
Where is PLASA based?
How many individuals does PLASA represent?
What does RoHS stand for?
What does ISP stand for?
what does an isp do?
What forms can an isp be organized in?
What type of organization provides internet access?
What are some services provided by an isp?
Why was the internet developed?
when was the internet developed?
what happened to the internet in the late 1980s?
When were remaining restrictions on the internet removed?
how long after the introduction of the world wide web was 1995?
Where were the first isps established?
where was the first commercial isp in the us located? 
when was the first commercial isp customer served?
when were the first commercial isps established?
what was the name of the first commercial isp in the us?
What would the absence of net neutrality permit? 
what may possibly be a solution to net neutrality concerns? 
how did president obama recommend to classify the internet? 
what did the fcc choose to apply to the internet? 
what would the internet be classified as based on title ii? 
When did the FCC rule on net neturality?
How did the FCC rule on net neutrality?
what did the FCC adopt for the internet? 
what amendment did the chairman of the FCC compare this ruling to? 
what did the FCC chairman say both the internet and the first amendment stand for?
When did the FCC publish its final rule on net neutrality regulations?
What do ISPs provide?
how do isps provide internet access?
what is one type of technology used to connect to the internet? 
what type of technology is used to connect to the internet wirelessly? 
what was an earlier technology used to connect to the internet? 
what traditional options were available for users and small businesses? 
what is it called when fiber-optics are used for end users?
who is served by dial-up, dsl, adsl, cable modems, or isdns?
What type of customers would typically have more demanding requirements? 
what does atm stand for in relation to internet providers? 
what is high-speed dsl used for? 
what is SONET? 
What is a mailbox provider? 
What is an organization that provides hosting of electronic mail domains? 
what is the purpose of a mailbox provider? 
how does a user store electronic mail?
What is SMTP?
What is IMAP?
How is access to mail provided? 
what are most mailbox providers as well? 
who possibly controls their own mail servers? 
What do internet hosting services provide? 
Who provides a virtual server service?
who provides cloud services?
Who does an ISP pay for internet access?
Why does an ISP need to pay an upstream ISP?
What does an upstream ISP provide for an ISP?
what usually has a larger network, the ISP of the customer or the upstream ISP?
What is the simplest case of an ISP using an upstream ISP? 
what do transit ISPs provide? 
A mode of interconnection is often cascaded multiple times until reaching what?
What is a PoP?
What provides bandwidth for the connecting of hosting ISPs and access ISPs?
What is a VISP?
What do VISPs resemble? 
What do visps purchase services from? 
What are free ISPs?
What do free ISPs display in exchange for service?
What are free ISPs similar to? 
How are freenets run? 
What is a WISP? 
What technology is part of a WISP?
What are some bands that Wi-Fi can operate over? 
What is a wireless internet service provider's network based on?
What is peering? 
What does peering allow? 
Why is peering used? 
What are IXs? 
Where do multiple ISPs connect? 
Is a tradeoff between efficiency and cost possible? 
What sort of route does data follow? 
What are ISPs subject to monitoring by in some countries? 
What is the controversial N.S.A. program used in the U.S.?
What does PRISM do? 
What do ISPs integrate into their network to provide information to intelligence agencies? 
What do DCSnet in the US and SORM in Russia do? 
In what century was the term matter defined excluding energy phenomena like light and sound?
What term is used for the substance that composes all observable physical objects?
The mass of an object can come from the motion of its constituents or what other source?
What term is used to describe the type of definition that matter would have if all scientists could agree on its definition?
Prior to the 20th century, the definition of matter included any object that had mass even when it was in what state? 
What kind of particles make up every object in the world that can be touched?
The smaller particles that make up atoms, like protons and neutrons, are what kind of particles?
What subatomic particle has no volume or rest mass?
What  kind of particles are quarks and leptons?
Despite not having size or volume themselves, quarks and leptons contribute to what measure of composite particles in matter?
How many phases of matter are there?
What new phase of matter can be considered with a focus on elementary particles?
What is the theory that matter is made up of discrete building blocks called?
What colleague of Democritus, also a Greek philosopher, helped him propose the particulate theory of matter?
People have been wondering about the nature of matter for the entire history of what branch of science?
What similar term is often used interchangeably with matter, although the two differ slightly in modern physics?
Being a conserved quantity means that the value of mass doesn't ever change as long as it's in what kind of system?
Special relativity says matter can disappear by conversion into what state?
What planet isn't a closed system but sometimes appears to be because of the approximate conservation of matter?
What term does science not have a universally-accepted scientific definition for?
Sometimes scientific terms were historically considered in ways we know now aren't compatible because scientists didn't need to distinguish matter from what other term?
What word do physicists sometimes consider to be defined as particles exhibiting rest mass?
What duality describes the conflicting properties of matter in the fields of chemistry and physics?
Quarks and leptons are sometimes considered matter because they can't travel at what speed?
What is the center of the nervous system in all creatures?
What is the most complex organ in an animal's body?
In people, how many neurons make up the cerebral cortex?
Neurons in the brain interact with each other by fibers called what?
A few animals without spines that do not have a brain are what?
Hormones secreted are driven by what organ in the body?
What type of responsiveness can be used without a brain?
Reflexes only require one of what two structures in a body?
Which part of a computer does the brain most resemble?
Animals with a spine are called what?
Animals without a spine are called what?
The easiest way to learn about brain anatomy is by what?
Brain tissue is naturally soft, but can be stiffened with what liquid?
The two main areas of the brain are what colors?
What instrument can you use to examine the microstructure of the brain?
Grey matter of the brain is what color?
Brains of organisms are made up mostly of what two classes of cells?
Glial cells are also referred to as what?
Which of the two broad classes of cells: neurons and glial cells send signals to other cells?
Axons send signals that are named what?
What is the typical speed that axons send their electrical signals?
Axons send signals to other neurons by junctions known as what?
The neurotansmitter binds to what of a target cell?
An axon can connect to how many other cells?
How many synapses does the human brain supposedly contain?
The fruit fly has a brain that has how many synapses?
A synapse whose purpose is to excite the target cell are called what?
The primary job of the brain is what?
Axons grouped together are known as what?
An axon that can greatly increase speed of signals is wrapped in what?
Myelin is what color in the brain?
Most of the space in the brain is made up of what structures?
Grey matter of the brain consist of lots of what?
Creatures that have a diffuse nerve net are called what?
Bilaterians are animals that have what?
The Cambrian period was how long ago?
A nerve cord with an enlargement is called what?
What type of creature has a ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord as well?
A name for a group of primitive flatworms is what?
Some bilaterians without a brain are what?
Which two groups of invertebrates have complex brains?
Arthropods and cephalopods have brains that come from a pair of what?
The invertebrates with the largest brain are what two animals?
Which brains are easier to work on, vertebrates or invertebrates?
How long ago did the first vertebrate organisms appear?
During which scientific period did vertebrates appear?
Sharks appeared at about how many Mya?
The foremost part of the brain in mammals is known as what?
At how many mya did mammals first appear in time?
Do predators have larger or smaller brains compared to their prey?
In mammals, brain volume and body mass follows a power law with an exponent of what?
Which group of animals have brains 5-10 times larger than the formula predicts?
The forebrain during development is known as what?
The midbrain during development is known as what?
The hindbrain during development is known as what?
Which group of animals does the forebrain grow the largest?
During development, the brain is made up of three swellings at the front of what?
Brain tissue that is living is what color on the outside?
The color of the brain inside is what?
Brains are surrounded by what system of tissues?
Meninges separate what structure from the brain?
The blood-brain barrier is made up of what?
People who study the anatomy of the central nervous system are known as what?
The cerebral hemispheres of the brain are called what?
The thalamus and hypothalamus comprise what region of the brain?
The midbrain region of the brain is known as what?
Clusters of small nuclei comprise what parts of the brain?
The forebrain is everted in what type of fishes?
Which part of the brain has led to many distortions among different species?
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a birds relative to body size?
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a reptiles relative to body size?
The biggest difference between brains of mammals and other vertebrates is what?
What part of the brain most strongly differentiates mammals from other vertebrates?
The three-layered structure covering the cerebrum in non-mammals is known as what?
Mammals have a pallium that involved into what?
The hippocampus and amygdala are ares inside what structure?
The superior colliculus is related to what sensual control of vertebrates?
The larger part of the cerebellum in mammals is called what?
The Neocerebellum supports what other part of the brain?
Comparing brain sizes among different creatures is used most commonly by what?
What is the average EQ of a person?
Primates have an EQ in what range?
Primates have a visual processing network of how many brain areas?
The visual processing areas occupy how much of the surface of the neocortex or primates?
Planning, motivation, and attention are controlled by what area?
The prefrontal cortex is the largest in what animals?
The precursor of the nervous system is called what in vertebrates?
The neural groove is a hollow cord of cells with what in the center?
The forebrain splits during development into vesicles called what?
The vesicle that contains the cerebral cortex is which one?
The thalamus and hypothalamus are contained in which vesicle?
A growth cone of an axon is made up of a blob of what?
What two structures does a neuron extend when it is in place during development?
The infant brain contains more of what type of cells in the brain than the adult brain?
The olfactory bulb is related to what sense?
What area of the hippocampus plays a role in storing new memories?
Which type of cells in the brain are generated throughout your lifetime?
Neurogenesis is the process of what?
The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by what?
What type of signals do neurons transfer from one another?
Chemicals called neurotransmitters are released at what part of the brain?
What do neurotransmitters attach to?
Neurons that release the same chemicals are following what rule?
GABA is the abbreviation for what?
Which of two neurotransmitters is usually inhibitory?
The neurostransmitter that usually excites targets is called what?
Tranquilizers affect which of the two common neurotransmitters?
Serotonin comes from what part of the brain?
Antidepressants typically affect what chemical of the brain?
Which chemical of the brain is involved with arousal?
Norepinephrine comes from an area of the brain known as what?
An EEG of the brain stands for what?
MEG of the brain is an abbreviation of what?
What type of test is used to tell that a brain is active even during sleep?
What type of brain waves are seen in mammals during sleep?
What type of brain waves are sen when a creature is awake, but inattentive?
What type of cells have a huge role in brain metabolism?
Glial cells control what inside the brain?
Where does the brain usually get most of its energy from inside the body?
The energy used for metabolism of the brain in humans is what percentage?
Other sources than glucose that provide energy to the brain are what?
Most vertebrates usually devote how much metabolism to the brain?
The function of the brain from an evolutionary-biological thought is what?
Computers were invented in what decade in history?
Neuroscience spawned from what field of science in history?
Who wrote the book, The Computer and the Brain?
When was John von Neumann's book, The Computer and the Brain published?
The scientific paper, What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain was released in what year?
Who won a Nobel Prize for the discovery that cells in the visual cortex of monkeys become active when sharp edges move?
What is the project called that is trying to build a realistic, detailed computer model of the human brain?
What type of animal has a sense that adapted into sonar?
What type of animal uses infrared heat to sense?
The group of animals that can detect magnetic fields is what?
The group of creatures that can sense electric fields is what?
Light-receptive neurons are located in what part of the eye?
Vibration-sensitive neurons are found in what part of the ear?
Signals are sent from the thalamus to what part of the brain?
What part of the body is controlled by nuclei in the midbrain?
All the muscles controlled by motor neurons in the body are controlled by what?
Which motor areas of the brain control breathing and swallowing?
At the lowest level of the brain and spinal cord, are what areas?
The red nucleus controls what part(s) of the body?
A strip of tissue found at the edge of the frontal lobe is called what?
The primary motor cortex sends signals to the spinal cord through what?
The brain and spinal cord work together to control what system of the body?
What system in the body controls heart rate?
What system in the body controls salivation?
Most of the processes of the autonomic nervous system are called what?
Which system in the body controls urination?
The SCN of the nervous system is an abbreviation for what?
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is a small part of what part of the brain?
Which part of the arousal system controls the body's biological clock?
The RHT is an abbreviation for what?
THE SCN receives information from the optic nerves through what?
A group of neuron-clusters scattered in the core of the lower brain is called what?
Reticular neurons transfer signals to what part of the brain?
Damage to the reticular formation can cause what?
The SCN transfers signals to a set of areas that implement what?
There are two types of sleep called what?
What type of sleep involves dreaming?
The three types of brain activity that can be measured are what?
Slow wave sleep is also known as what?
During what stage of sleep do serotonin and norepinephrine levels drop?
Homeostasis is defined as what?
Homeostasis is Greek for what phrase?
The milieu interieur term was used by what physiologist?
Homeostasis is like what household tool?
The hypothalamus is located at the base of what?
In vertebrates, the most important part of the brain is what?
A collection of small nuclei at the base of the forebrain is called what?
The gland directly underneath the hypothalamus is which gland?
The pituitary gland sends hormones through what in the body?
A set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain is called what?
The basal ganglia is thought to be the central location at which what are made?
Which neurotransmitter plays a large role in drug abuse?
Which of the two systems, reward or punishment is better understood?
In what year did Tim Bliss and Terje Lomo publish a paper about long-term potentiation?
BDNF is an abbreviation for what term?
Learning and memory expressed as changes in the synaptic connections was first theorized by whom?
What field of science studies the brain and the central nervous system?
What scientific field tries to understand the mind and behavior?
What field of science strives to diagnose and treat diseases of the nervous system?
Psychiatry is the branch of science that does what?
Cognitive science seeks to join what two branches of science with other fields?
The oldest known method of studying the brain is what?
What do neuroanatomists study?
What type of study uses medical imaging techniques to correlate changes in brain structure?
Until what century was brain studying mostly anatomical?
What do neurophysiologists study?
The most common tools that neurophysiologists use are what?
What type of receptors does the brain lack?
Electrodes are often glued to what like in EEG studies?
The brain is surrounded by what type of fluid?
The brain is separated from the bloodstream by what feature?
The two main structures that protect the brain are what?
What type of disease if often studied to understand damage to the brain?
What type of animal is most commonly used to study brain damage?
Computational neuroscience is concerned with what two studies?
What is the most common test subjects for studying of the brain?
Where was the oldest brain that was found?
How old was the oldest brain discovered thought to be?
The oldest known brain discovered was found in how old of a person?
The oldest brain found in a cave was from what gender of human?
The seal of the soul was debated to lie in what two organs of the body?
Aristotle thought the soul lied in what organ?
Who invented the atomic theory of matter?
The "father of medicine" is a name given to whom in history?
What philosopher in history argued for a three-part soul?
The physician Galen was from which country in history?
What period in history was anatomical  studies of nerves greatly increased?
Who coined the term pneumata psychikon?
Penumata psychikon is usually translated as what?
Who found out that a shock of electricity to an exposed nerve of a dead frog caused contractions?
The tool that was invented to stain only a small fractions of neurons was called what?
What nationality was santiago Ramon y Cajal?
Work in the first half the 20th century in electrical properties of nerve cells were by what two main scientists?
Which decade in history was officially called the "Decade of the Brain"?
Multielectrode recording allows what?
Genetic engineering allows what?
What does genomics allow the study of?
During what century was multielectrode recording invented?
Genetic engineering was first discovered in what century?
In what decade was digital telephony transmission made possible?
What is the minimum bit rate for compressed video and audio transmission?
What is an example of an early form of digital video and audio communication?
In what form did the first dedicated videoconferencing system appear as?
What company offered the first commercial videoconferencing system?
What controls the conferencing while its active on the signaling plane?
What is one example of what the signaling plane controls in a videoconferencing system?
Where does the videoconferencing system manage conferencing creation?
On what plane does the MC operate?
What generates output streams from each endpoint?
What technology has become more widely available and affordable?
What is an example of a personal videoconferencing system tool?
What has made videoconferencing accessible to many?
Videoconferencing freeware is widely available in what programs?
Videophone calls are different from videoconferencing in what way?
What is an example of a videophone call program?
What term is more used today to refer to calls between two units?
What are videoconferencing calls now more commonly known as?
What is another name for videophone calls?
In what decade did developers extend the capabilities of videoconferencing to more devices?
What allows people in remote locations the ability to video-conference with colleagues far away?
What is one example of an application that videoconferencing manufacturers have begun to offer?
What type of applications have videoconferencing manufacturers begun to offer?
What is an example of a place that videoconferencing can be used today?
What can videoconferencing offer students?
Who can benefit from two-way communication forums?
What is a major barrier to videoconferencing between some communities?
What is one example of how students can benefit from videoconferencing?
What is one experience that students using videoconferencing can achieve?
What company introduced the first device to help deaf people communicate through telecommunications?
What was the name of AT&T's videophone device?
In what year was AT&T's "Picturephone" device introduced?
Where was AT&T's "Picturephone" device unveiled?
In what decade were more efficient ways of using sign language via video-telephony developed?
In what industry has videoconferencing become useful?
On what film was videoconferencing widely used?
What year was the movie Frozen released?
In what city were the songwriting team of Frozen located?
How many months did the songwriters work on the movie via videoconferencing?
What is a video-conference also known as?
What does a video-conference use that allows communication in live situations?
What is a multi-point control unit?
How does video-conferencing allow multiple parties to communicate with each other?
How many locations can one use videoconferencing for?
What is one area where teleconferencing could not be used?
Who developed the first systems to transmit slow-scan video?
When was the first slow-scan video systems researched?
What was the bit rate of AT&T's Picturephone?
What was the bandwidth of AT&T's Picturephone?
What year did one the first community service usages of videoconferencing take place?
What company helped in the creation of community service videoconferencing?
What is the videoconferencing product that both IBM and PictureTel worked on?
What does DIANE in Project DIANE stand for?
How many years did it take for Project DIANE to grow?
What enables videoconferencing to connect three or more remote points?
What is one type of MCU bridge?
In what way can an MCU be characterized?
What feature enables an MCU to allow for multiple parties to be seen on screen at the same time?
Where can an MCU be embedded?
In what one way can videoconferencing help a person?
What technology can be used along with videoconferencing?
What is another use of VoIP?
What is telecommuting?
What is the percentage of people who use videoconferencing a majority of the time?
In what decade was Internet video-conferencing made possible?
In what device was videoconferencing finally able to be used in?
In what year was CU-SeeMe, a desktop-based videoconferencing tool, developed?
In what year did the first public video-conference take place?
What South African city participated in the first public video-conference?
What is the software that performs audio and/or video compression?
How high can compression rates go?
What is one digital network through which a digital stream can be transmitted?
What does POTS stand for?
What do POTS do?
What is a common use of conferencing technology?
What profession utilizes videoconferencing technology to conduct online sessions?
What is one way that videocalling can be used?
What is a common use of conferencing technology?
What is one way that videoconferencing is useful?
What areas benefit especially from videoconferencing? 
In what US state did a rural area use videoconferencing to help reduce the number of transfers of sick infants to hospitals? 
How far away was the hospital from this rural area?
How much money did videoconferencing help this rural area save?
In what European country has VRS services become well developed?
What is one of the reasons why VRS services are not in most European countries?
What European country is a leader in providing VRS services to its citizens?
What country is a world leader in providing VRS services?
What year was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?
Who produced the first high definition video conferencing system?
Where was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?
What company introduced the first HD video conferencing system to the general market?
What was the resolution of the first HD video conferencing system?
What do systems with no MCU use in order to perform multipoint conferencing?
What is one advantage of using an H.323 technique?
What is one disadvantage of using the H.323 technique?
What is the H.323 technique also known as?
Why is the video and audio of the H.323 technique higher quality?
Who has the world's largest administrative judicial system?
What US Department oversees the World's largest administrative judicial system?
In what year did the SSA see a 55% increase in videoconferenced hearings?
When did the SSA open its largest videoconferencing-only center?
Where is the SSA's fifth videoconferencing only center located?
Where was the band Blue Cheer from?
What classic song did Blue Cheer cover?
What was the hit off Steppenwolf's self-titled debut lp?
What movie featured that Steppenwolf single?
The lyrics to "Born To Be Wild" contain the first reference to what hard rock style?
The band Rush is what nationality?
What are the first three Rush albums?
What nationality was Thin Lizzy?
What was Thin Lizzy's hit single?
The Scorpions hailed from what country?
What is the title of Bon Jovi's third lp?
How many copies did this record sell?
What was the band Europe's international hit?
What was Van Halen's 1986 album called?
Who was the new lead singer for Van Halen on 5150?
What Aerosmith ballad debuted at number one on the charts?
What was the title of AC/DC's 1995 double lp?
Bon Jovi's 1995 album was called what?
What commercially successful sub-genre emerged from the grunge movement?
When did Aerosmith's album Get A Grip come out?
What are two examples of glam metal bands?
What two genres cut into hard rock's popularity at the end of the 1980s and early 1990s?
What were some hard rock bands of the 1970s?
What style did some hard rock bands embrace in the 1980s?
What genre laid the roots for hard rock?
Who recorded "Rumble"?
When was "Rumble" released?
What were two of Dick Dale's better known songs?
What city's blues style produced hard rock precursors in electric blues?
What was the landmark hard rock album recorded by the Rolling Stones in 1972?
Which Led Zeppelin album featured the hit "Stairway to Heaven"?
What two hard rock songs are featured on Deep Purple's Machine Head album?
Who was Deep Purple's guitarist?
Who was the drummer for The Who?
Who was the original lead singer of AC/DC who died?
Who was the Led Zeppelin drummer who passed away?
What singer replaced Ozzy Osbourne in Black Sabbath?
What was Ozzy Osbourne's first solo album?
What are some thrash metal bands?
Guns N Roses released both Use Your Illusion albums in what year?
What band's debut was titled Shake Your Money Maker?
What was the title of Def Leppard's 1992 album?
Adrenalize followed what 1987 Def Leppard record?
Adrenalize topped US album charts for how long?
When did the band The Darkness break up?
The Sword, High on Fire, Witchcraft and Wolfmother are all examples of what hard rock sub-genre?
What is the title of Airbourne's debut lp?
Glam metal band Steel Panther is from what city?
What are some Swedish sleaze metal revivalist bands?
Who were three Chicago blues players who influenced hard rock?
Who recorded "You Really Got Me"?
"Shapes of Things" was a 1966 single by what band?
What garage rock classic was recorded by The Kingsmen?
When did the Rolling Stones release "(I Can't Get No" Satisfaction"?
When did Free break up?
What band did Free lead singer Paul Rodgers help form?
Bad Company's self titled debut album was released in what year?
What nationality was the band Nazareth?
What was Queen's massive 1975 hit single called?
What sub-genre of hard rock does Def Leppard belong to?
What was Def Leppard's second album called?
What were the three Top 40 singles from Def Leppard's Pyromania album?
What band had the first glam metal album to hit number one on the Billboard charts?
When did Motley Crue's album Shout At The Devil come out?
What was the title of Nirvana's 1991 album?
What was the hard rock style that emerged in the early 1990s?
What are some grunge bands with a strong 1970s influence?
What 1990s hard rock band had a big stadium rock sound?
What element made Oasis unique among 1990s Britpop bands?
When did the Foo Fighters album In Your Honor come out?
Three Days Grace is from what country?
The band Jet is from what country?
What supergroup featured members of Foo Fighters, Queens of the Stone Age and Led Zeppelin?
What was the title of Buckcherry's 2007 hit single?
What instrument is usually at the center of a hard rock sound?
Rhythm guitar in hard rock usually plays what?
In hard rock, an electric guitar can also be used for what?
What carries the backbeat in hard rock drumming?
What instrument works in tandem with the drums to provide hard rock rhythms?
Who was the guitarist for the band Cream?
Who was the guitarist in the Kinks?
Who played guitar in The Who?
When did The White Album come out?
Keith Richards is the guitarist of what band?
Who recorded the album School's Out?
Tres Hombres is the name of an album by what band?
Who was the lead singer of Montrose?
Kiss' double live album Alive! came out in what year?
Who had a hit single with "(Don't Fear) The Reaper"?
What was the title of Deep Purple's 1980s reunion album?
What album was Van Halen's commercial high point?
In what year did ZZ Top release Eliminator?
What band recorded "Keep On Loving You"?
The hit single "Amanda" was recorded by what band?
What was Van Halen's last album with Sammy Hagar?
Who was the Guns N Roses drummer who was fired by the band?
What former member of Extreme briefly served as the lead singer for Van Halen?
Who was the only original member left in Guns N Roses?
Slash left Guns N Roses in what year?
By the late 60s, what term was synonymous with hard rock?
What heavy metal group introduced darker themes to the music?
What genre was an influence on extreme metal in the 1980s?
Hard rock is differentiated from heavy metal by containing more of an influence of what genre?
In heavy metal, riffs typically form what element of a song?
Led Zeppelin's first two albums both came out in what year?
What was the title of Deep Purple's hard rock 1970 album?
Black Sabbath's lyrics contained references to what cultural touchstones?
What is the title of Black Sabbath's 1970 album?
What is one band directly influenced by Black Sabbath?
What two genres made inroads on hard rock in the 1970s?
What punk band's songs rarely exceeded two minutes in length?
What were three midwestern hard rock bands?
What city was Van Halen originally from?
Which Van Halen instrumental showcased the guitar mastery of Eddie Van Halen?
How many copies did Whitesnake's 1987 self title album sell?
What was the title of Aerosmith's 1987 comeback album?
Def Leppard's album Hysteria churned out how many hit singles?
What Guns N Roses album was the second best selling debut of all time?
What Guns N Roses song became a number one single?
What hard rock supergroup contained members of Soundgarden and Rage Against the Machine?
What was the title of Bon Jovi's 2000 hit single?
What band released an album called Stiff Upper Lip in 2000?
Who was the lead singer of Stone Temple Pilots?
What was Guns N Roses long delayed 2008 album called?
What hindered the competetive ability of Apple when it was introduced?
Where did Macintosh initially find success in the market?
Which platform, when improved in the 1990's, took market share from Macintosh?
What type of advantage did Intel's Pentium over Macintosh systems in the 1990's?
Who became the top PC manufacturer in 1994, leaving Apple in 3rd place?
How much RAM did the first Maciuntosh board have?
Whose idea was it to run Apple Lisa's graphical programs on the Macintosh?
What did Tribble first incorporate into the Mac?
Which design feature did Smith eventually use to make production of a newly designed board more cost-efficient?
What feature was missing from the final Mac design produced by Smith?
How much did Apple spend to advertise in a special post-election issue of Newsweek?
What was the name of the big promotion Apple ran in the special edition of Newsweek?
What did Apple allow potential buyers to take home and try for 24 hours?
How were many computers returned during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion that made them unsellable?
Who was the CEO of Apple during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion?
What was the longest-lived Macintosh in Apple's history while it was in production?
How long did the Mac Plus remain in production, unchanged?
In 1986, what did Apple introduce to allow developers to create software for Macintosh on Macintosh?
What did Apple's HyerCard and MultiFinder add to the Macintosh?
After their unveiling in 1987, what did Apple begin bundling with every Macintosh?
What Macintosh first included an on-board MMU?
What was the first Mac to be "32-bit clean"?
What was the starting price of the Macintosh llfx when it was unveiled?
How many Apple II CPUS's did the new Macintosh llfx include?
How fast was the processor on the new Macintosh llfx?
Which Mac is known for improving the handling of color graphics?
Who did Apple pay expensive consulting fees to before doing in-house work?
What was established for bringing Apple's design work in-house?
Who was responsible for crafting a new look for all Apple products?
How did the Mac System 7 improve multitasking?
Who returned to Apple in 1997?
What did Steve Jobs order the OS version 7.7 to be branded as?
What did the branding of the Mac OS 8 effectively end?
What effect did Mac's decision to brand the Mac OS8 have on companies such as Motorola?
How much money did Umax lose when it exited the low-end Mac clone market?
What did dated architecture on the Mac OS line make necessary?
What programming language was the Mac OS initially developed in?
What language replaced Pascal for System 7?
What was the fuly overhauled successor to Mac OS 9?
Upon release, what interface allowed Mac users to sample Apple's new operating system and provide feedback for the actual release?
What is the only mainstream computer platform to successfully transition to a new CPU architecture?
What is the standard amount of RAM included with almost all current Mac models?
Which MacBook Pro port can transfer data at speeds up to 10 gigabits per second?
When was the iMac G5 released?
Which interface did Apple introduce that was capable of being operated by an Apple Remote or keyboard for accessing media stored on the computer?
What is the standard amount of RAM shipped with most Mac models?
What processors are used by the current Mac product family?
How many data transfer ports are included in most current Macs?
According to Apple, how fast can the Thunderbolt port transfer data?
Which technique was once used to boot an alternate operating system than Mac OS?
What was introduced that made using Mac OS alternative operating systems easier?
What were Open Firmware-based PCI Macs used as a convenience because of?
Where does Mac hardware boot directly to in all Intel-based Macs?
Where does Mac harware boot directly to in most PowerPC-based Macs?
Who was brought in to shape the marketing of Macintosh in 1982?
What role did Andy Cunningham and Jane Anderson have in the Macintosh launch plan?
Who introduced the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept to Apple?
Which company first used the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept?
What did the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept create around a product?
Who initiated a successful price war among PC manufacturers in 1994?
Who did Compaq overtake in the price war of 1994?
What happened to Apple's market share with the release of Windows 95?
What unified Microsoft's MS-DOS and Windows products?
What significantly enhanced the multimedia capability of IBM PC compatible computers?
What percent of the desktop share in the U.S. did Apple have in 2003?
Who are IDC and Gartner?
What was Apple's market share in the U.S. by 2006?
What percentage of unit sale increase did Apple see from 2005 to 2006?
What was the estimated installed base of Mac computers in 2009?
When was the Macintosh SE released at the same time as?
What was the first compact Mac with a 20 MB internal hard drive and an expansion slot?
What was the starting price of the Macintosh SE?
What did the location of the SE's expansion slot potentially expose an upgrader to?
Who did Apple suggest users go to for performing updates on their SE's?
What is partially credited for the significant boost in sales of Macs in recent years?
What allows users to easily sync data between an iPhone and a Mac?
What consumer trend has hurt many personal computer manufacturers?
Which smartphone has hurt personal computer manufacterers the most?
What are the top two computing devices consumers are choosing?
What did Apple introduce in 1990 to combat competition from smartphones?
What was the less expensive version of the Macintosh SE that was offered until 2001?
Which Macintosh had a distinctive "pizza box" case?
How many expansion slots did the Macintosh IIsi have?
How did Apple's profit margin on the lower cost Mac's compare to the profit margin onearlier models?
When did Apple begin to favor aluminum in their design?
Which Mac used aluminum in it's construction?
Which material did Apple add with the 2008 unibody MacBrook Pro?
Are aluminum and glass considered to be environmentally friendly or environmentally harmful?
What has Chief Designer Jonathan Ive been able to eliminate in Mac notebooks?
Who began the Macintosh project in 1979?
What was Jef Raskin's profession?
What did Jef Raskin envision for a computer to be for an average consumer?
Why was the spelling of McIntosh changed to Macintosh?
What did McIntosh Laboratory, Inc. manufacture?
Who discussed rumors of a mysterious "MacIntosh" project in 1983?
Where was the Macintosh 128K manufactured?
How much did the television commercial "1984" cost?
What did the television commercial "1984" introduce?
What did Regis McKenna call the "1984" ad that was aired during the Super Bowl?
When was the Macintosh branded as Mac?
Who designed, develped, and marketed the Mac computers?
What did Steve Jobs introduce on January 24, 1984?
What interface type did the original Macintosh include?
When did Apple begin phasing out Macintosh in favor of "Mac"?
When was the activity of desktop publishing first used?
What company was desktop publishing unique to at it's beginning?
What three things were combined to develop desktop publishing?
What did desktop publishing enable users to do?
What applications strengthened Mac's position as a graphics computer?
What year was Raskin hired by Apple?
Who did Raskin immediately hire to help him on the Apple project in 1979?
Who comprised the original Mac team besides Raskin?
Who eventually lead the project on the Mac team?
How many Macs did Apple sell worldwide during the 2009 holiday season?
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2010?
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2011?
What ranking was Apple in the PC global market share during 2014?
Who outperformed Apple in the 2014 PC global market share?
In 1987, what did Apple spin off its software business as?
Which series of applications was Claris responsible for inventing?
What did Claris rename the Informix Wingz spreadsheet program?
What was ClarisWorks renamed beginning with version 5.0?
When was ClarisWorks reincorporated back into Apple?
What two applications came bundled with Macs 2 days after "1984" was aired?
Why did many software developers choose not to redesign the Mac operating system and rewrite the programming code?
What year did Microsoft's MultiPlan migrate over from MS-DOS?
What year was Apple's Macintosh Office suite introduced?
What did Apple's "Lemmings" ad, which introduced Macintosh Office, do that made the ad unsuccessful?
According to NPD, who has generally dominated the premium PC market?
What was Macintosh ranked on the "list of intended brands for desktop purchases" for the 2011 holiday season?
Who did Macintosh displace from 2nd place on the 2012 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?
Who did Macintosh displace from 1st place on the 2013 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?
Which of Apple's products is focused on the ultraportable niche of PC's?
What part of the Mac's could not be expanded easily in 1984?
What did Mac's lack in 1984 and have no means to easily attach?
What did some small companies suggest Mac's 16 memory chips be replaced with?
How much more memory did Apple's Macintosh 512K, introduced in 1984, have than the original?
What was replaced in the upgrade that was offered for 128k Macs?
On what grounds did Apple sue Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard in 1988?
How was the lawsuit decided for Apple vs. Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard?
How long did the FSF boycott GNU software for the Macintosh platform?
What are some of the issues Apple cited in the lawsuit against Microsoft and HP?
What did the FSF feel that Apple was trying to monopolize on?
What did Apple's creation of too many similar models do to potential buyers?
What was the hardware manufactured by third parties for Apple's System 7 known as?
What did the Macintosh clones provide for consumers?
What did Macintosh clones succeed in increasing for Macintosh?
Who did the Macintosh clones hurt financially?
When did Apple begin shipping computers with CD-RW drives?
Who admitted that Apple was late to the party with writable CD technology?
What did Apple begin offering as standard features meant for playing DVD's?
Which Apple campaign did some people feel encouraged media piracy?
What is the name of one of Apple's unsuccessful products?
What was the name of Apple's first portable computer?
When was the Macintosh Portable first released?
What replaced the Macintosh Portable in 1991?
What was the 1993 PowerBook 165c Apple's first portable computer to feature?
Which generation of PowerBooks introduced trackpads?
What was Apple's Mac OS X based on?
Who did Apple make Maverick free to?
What computers is Maverick compatible with?
What brought better multi display support to Mac?
When was Mavericks introduced?
What desktop did Apple release after the discontinued Power Macintosh G3?
Why were sales of the Power Mac G4 Cube slow?
What did the Power Mac G4 have trouble overcoming after they dropped their price and upgraded their hardware?
When was the Power Mac G4 discontinued?
How did the actual sales of the G4's compare to the sales expectations?
Historically, what is near-absent in Mac OS X compared to Microsoft Windows?
When did Mac OS X experience a large increase in malware attacks?
How was Mac's malware seen by many Mac users in 2011?
How many users were affected by the increase in malware?
What were Apple support staff initially instructed not to assist with concerning malware?
What was the market share of OS X in North America by March 2011?
Being positioned as a higher end PC, what is it misleading to compare the Mac to?
Apple has remained profitable since what time?
According to market research, who does Apple draw it's customer base from?
Whose return to Apple resulted in the company's reorganization?
Who refused to lower the profit margins on Mac computers in 1989?
What problem rocked the PC industry in 1989?
What did the component shortage of 1989 force Allan Loren to do with Macs?
Who was Allan Loren?
When was Microsoft Windows 3.0 released?
What did Apple begin to eliminate in 2002?
Why was the new iMac G4 considerably more expensive than the G3?
Who did Apple create the more affordable eMac in April 2002 for?
What was the main problem with the eMac's CRT?
After Apple's failed desktop sales, what products drove their sales growth?
In 2009, how many Macs sold were laptops?
What has helped Macs more directly compete with Windows on price and performance?
In 2010, what did Apple receive before other PC manufacturers?
What are the top-selling form factors of the Mac platform today?
What is the name of the most inexpensive Mac offered?
What did Apple consolidate in 1998?
What all-in-one product was created in 1998 through Apple's consolidations?
What did the iMac G3 do to the Mac reputation?
When was Mac's Xserve server discontinued?
What took the place of Mac's Xserve server?
Why did Raskin leave the Apple team in 1981?
According to Andy Hertzfeld, whose idea is the final Mac design closer to?
What did Steve Jobs offer Xerox to visit and see their latest technology?
Whose technology influenced the user interfaces of the Lisa and Macintosh?
What caused Steve Jobs to resign from Apple in 1985?
What did Jobs state that he expected Macintosh to become?
How many applications were widely available during Macintosh's introduction?
How many companies did Apple promise were develping products for the new computer?
How many Macintoshes had Apple sold after one year?
How many databases did Apple have available the first year?
Whose technology did Apple take advantage of when introducing the Macintosh II?
What powered the Macintosh II?
How much did the Macintosh II sell for?
What marked the start of a new direction for Macintosh?
What was the Macintosh II's new modular design similar to?
When Microsfot Windows 3.0 was released, what was it commonly said to not be as good as?
Who was Microsoft Windows 3.0 commonly said to be good enough for?
What was responsible for the drop in Apple's margins in 1989?
Who made the decision in 1989 to cut prices on Mac computers?
What was Microsoft Windows 3.0's performance comparable to?
What did Intel unsuccessfully try to push Apple to migrate to?
Which platform did Apple choose to use?
Who first rolled out Pentium processors in 1993?
How far behind was Macintosh set back compared to the new IBM compatibles?
When did Apple abandon Motorola CPU's?
What color was Apples new iMac, which was introduced in 1998?
What did the iMac replace most of Apple's standard connections with?
What did the iMac replace the floppy disk drive with?
What did the iMac need to use in order to write CDs or other media?
How many iMac units sold in the first 139 days?
When did Apple discontinue the use of PowerPC microprocessors?
Who announced the capability to run Windows XP on an Intel-based Mac in 2006?
How did hackers release their software for running Windows on Macs?
When did Apple announce software that would allow Windows XP to be run on Intel-based Macs?
What is the name of the software that Apple introduced for running Windows XP?
Who was initially reluctant to embrace mice with multiple buttons and scroll wheels?
What was the name of the 1st multiple button mouse introduced by Apple?
How many buttons did the Mighty Mouse have?
What did Apple introduce to take the place of a physical scroll wheel in 2009?
What Apple mouse 1st used multi-touch gesture recognition?
What type of software began to emerge following the release of Intel-based Macs?
At what speed do programs such as VirtualBox allow Microsoft Windows to run on Macs?
What is possible to run by using Boot camp, even though it is not condoned by Apple?
What do Macs lack that makes them unable to run many legacy PC operating systems?
What has been the best-selling ultra-portable over Windows Ultrabooks in the U.S.?
What earned the title as best all-around subnotebook/ultraportable?
What did the Air receive before other PC manufacturers?
Through 7/1/13, what percentage of all Ultrabook sales in the U.S. were MacBook Airs?
When was the competetive pricing of MacBooks especially effective?
What process begins after a death sentence is handed down at trial?
In a direct review, what type of court looks at the record?
How many possible outcomes are there of a capital sentencing direct review?
In a direct review, what court has its record reviewed by the appellate court?
What percentage of convictions survive direct review?
In what year was the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act passed?
How many habeas corpus suits does the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act normally allow in federal court?
What is the US Code citation for the Civil Rights Act of 1871?
Why does a litigant initiate a lawsuit under the Civil Rights Act of 1871?
Who was executed by firing squad on January 17, 1977?
In what state was Gary Gilmore executed?
On what date was John Spenkelink executed?
In what state did Jesse Bishop's execution occur?
How was Charles Brooks, Jr. executed?
What was a common nickname for the electric chair?
What color was Alabama's electric chair?
What state notably had electric chair malfunctions?
Due to electric chair malfunctions, what method of execution became preferred?
Prior to the popularity of lethal injection, what was the preferred method of executing criminals in America?
What state has had only a single execution?
When was the last person executed in the District of Columbia?
When did Oregon reinstate the death penalty?
In what year did an Oregon referendum succeed in restoring the death penalty, only to be shot down due to a court ruling?
What state notably abolished the death penalty and then reintroduced it, but didn't use it again?
In the United States, how many murders are there for each execution?
How many murder convictions occur in the US per execution?
How many states in the US have the death penalty?
What state has the highest rate of death sentences per person?
What does Alabama law allow judges to do that isn't allowed in other states?
What territory's constitution says "The death penalty shall not exist"?
What US state prohibits the death penalty in its constitution?
How many US states have passed laws outlawing the death penalty?
Under what jurisdiction can capital offenses still be committed in Puerto Rico?
In what year was the death penalty suspended in the US?
What Supreme Court case resulted in capital punishment being suspended?
Who was executed on June 2, 1967?
What amendment to the United States Constitution forbids cruel and unusual punishment?
In what year was the suspension of the death penalty in the United States ended?
What state's law says that death sentences must take place in an "enclosure"?
What state's law requires that capital punishment occur "within the walls" of a penitentiary?
What law has similar language to Missouri Revised Statute § 546.730?
Along with United States Code Title 18 § 3596, what federal law limits the people who can witness a federal execution?
What state's law mandated that executions occur in ""room or place enclosed from public view"?
In what year was Gregg v. Georgia decided?
Along with the guilt-innocence phase, what is the other phase of a death penalty trial under Gregg v. Georgia?
What is the only conviction that can lead to the death penalty?
Along with aggravating factors, what other factors are considered at the second hearing?
What is decided at the first proceeding?
How many executions occurred in 1999?
What was the number of people executed in 2015?
In what year did the reauthorization of capital punishment occur?
How many people have been executed in the United States since 1976?
Which state has the largest number of people awaiting execution?
In November 2008, who was on death penalty without a murder conviction?
Who did Demarcus Sears kidnap?
In what state was Gloria Ann Wilbur murdered?
In what year was Demarcus Sears convicted of kidnapping?
A jury in what state sentenced Demarcus Sears to death?
When a prisoner is given a death sentence in a state, what is the first step of collateral review?
About what percentage of capital convictions are overturned due to state collateral review?
In 2010, how many death sentences were overturned due to reversals from courts or appeals?
What is an example of an issue that is raised in collateral review?
In what case did the Supreme Court allow Section 1983 to be used to challenge a method of execution?
In what year was Hill v. McDonough decided?
What amendment of the Constitution does cruel and unusual punishment violate?
What case notably upheld the use of a method of lethal injection?
Along with Section 1983, through what means can a convict on death row challenge his execution?
How many people were killed in the largest mass execution in US history?
On what date did the largest mass execution in American history take place?
In what state did the largest American mass execution occur?
What was the ethnicity of the people executed in the second-largest mass execution in US history?
In what year did the Admiralty Court hang 26 pirates in Newport, Rhode Island?
What act restricted the scope of federal habeas corpus?
How may state prisoners seek to have a death sentence overturned in federal court?
In what courts can federal habeas corpus suits be brought?
If prisoners use federal habeas corpus to present evidence that they're innocent, what must the evidence be?
Along with New Jersey, what state commuted all life sentences when bills to repeal the death penalty were passed?
The governor of what state commuted four death sentences in January 2015?
Who was governor of Maryland in January 2015?
In what state's supreme court was State v. Santiago decided?
How many people had their sentences commuted by State v. Santiago?
In what court was Bigby v. Dretke decided?
What court heard the case Penry v. Lynaugh?
What amendment to the Constitution did Penry v. Lynaugh address?
What sentencing factors did Bigby v. Dretke consider?
In what year was Tony Chebatoris killed?
When was Michigan's fourth Constitution ratified?
In what city was Tony Chebatoris executed?
In what year was there a failed Michigan constitutional amendment to allow the death penalty?
What article of the fourth Michigan Constitution forbids laws allowing capital punishment?
Under what federal statute are offenses punished by lethal injection?
According to what law are federal prisoners executed according to the procedures in place in the state in which they were convicted?
In what month and year was Juan Garza executed?
Who was executed by the federal government on March 18, 2003?
In what state is the Federal Correctional Complex in Terre Haute?
In what year did the American Law Institute create a death penalty framework for the Model Penal Code?
In what year did the American Law Institute change their mind about their contribution on the death penalty to the Model Penal Code?
What goal did the ALI's study say could not be reconciled with the goal of individualized execution decisions?
In what year was Coker v. Georgia decided?
For what offense did Coker v. Georgia forbid the death penalty?
Along with Georgia, what American jurisdiction allowed people to be executed for the rape of an adult prior to Coker?
What ruling forbid the government from executing child rapists?
Prior to Kennedy v. Louisiana, how many states criminalized child rape?
In what year was Nebraska's death penalty statute ruled unconstitutional by a state court?
What state's court ruled capital punishment unconstitutional in 1984?
In what case did the Kansas Supreme Court rule that the death penalty is unconstitutional in Kansas?
What method of execution did the Nebraska Supreme Court rule unconstitutional?
After electrocution was outlawed, how were Nebraska death row inmates executed?
What death penalty drug ceased to be manufactured in 2011?
Up until 2011, who manufactured sodium thiopental?
What is the nationality of the company that makes pentobarbital?
Along with anti-death penalty advocacy, why has there been a shortage in drugs for lethal injections in the United States?
The EU outlawed the export of products that could be used in what activity?
In what year did the most polled American support capital punishment?
What percentage of polled Americans opposed the death penalty in 1966?
In a 1977 poll, what percentage of respondents preferred life imprisonment to the death penalty?
In a 2006 poll, what percentage of polled Americans preferred the death penalty to life without parole?
What is a notable capital crime in Louisiana?
In what state is extortionate kidnapping a capital offense?
Along with Alabama, where is hijacking an aircraft a death penalty offense?
In what state is armed robbery a capital crime?
In what states is perjury leading to death a capital offense?
Along with Marshall, who believed that the Eighth Amendment forbade the death penalty?
Along with Stewart, what Supreme Court justice was concerned about racial disparity in death penalty enforcement?
Aside from Stewart, what justice believed that the death penalty could be constitutional?
Between 1973 and 2015, how amny prisoners were acquitted or received pardons or commutations of their death sentences due to possible innocence?
What percentage of murderers in the United States are given a death sentence?
How many murderers in Nevada were given a capital sentence?
What state notably executes 40% of those given the death penalty?
How much higher is the rate of execution in Texas versus the national average?
What percentage of murderers in California are given the death penalty and subsequently executed?
Under the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988 and Federal Death Penalty Act of 1994, about how many crimes were punishable by death?
What body passed the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988?
What is another term for the act of spying for another country?
Along with treason and espionage, what non-death offense is still a federal capital crime?
Who was executed on January 17, 1977?
By what method was Gary Gilmore executed?
Aside from Gary Gilmore, how many people were executed in the United States between January 17, 1977 and 1984?
What tactic did inmates on death row use to delay their executions?
In what month and year was Troy Davis executed?
Who was the Death Penalty Information Center director?
What organization did Brian Evans work for?
How many execution methods are currently used in the United States?
What was the most common historical method of execution in the United States?
In what state did the last burning at the stake take place in the US?
Who was the last person hanged in chains in the Untied States?
When was execution by beheading ended in Utah?
What percentage of American death row prisoners are African American?
What percentage of people executed in the United States since 1976 have been African American?
What percentage of American prison inmates are African American?
What percentage of homicides were committed by Asians between 1980 and 2008?
What percentage of the American population is Hispanic?
In the United States, how many important steps are usually present in the administration of capital punishment?
Along with the President, what officeholder can issue pardons?
How many death sentences were issued in the period 1995-1996?
How many capital sentences were given in 1973?
In what year were there 73 death penalty convictions?
On what date was Fred Adams hanged?
Where was Bethea hanged?
What was Roscoe Jackson's nickname?
In what state did the hanging of Adams take place?
How many people witnessed Timothy McVeigh's execution?
What institution does James Liebman work for?
What does James Liebman teach?
According to Liebman, about what percentage of death penalty habeas corpus petitions were successful between 1978 and 1995?
According to Tabak, what percentage of habeas corpus petitions were granted to death row inmates between 1976 and 1991?
In what year did Liebman announce his findings?
Who was executed on March 30, 1960?
What method of execution was used on James W. Rodgers?
In what state was Rodgers executed?
On what date was George York executed?
Which state executed James French?
About how many American juveniles have been executed since 1642?
In what year was Thomas Graunger executed?
Since 1976, how many Americans have been executed for crimes committed as juveniles?
How old was George Stinney when he was executed?
What method was used to execute Leonard Shockley?
What state employed Robert Patton in May 2014?
As of May 2014, what was Robert Patton's job title?
What race was Clayton Lockett?
What gas did Oklahoma decide to use for executions in 2015?
What was Clayton Lockett's cause of death?
Along with gender, geography and race, what bias do some opponents of the death penalty see in its administration?
According to opponents of the death penalty, what does the death penalty cheapen?
According to death penalty opponents, on whose moral level does execution place the government?
What do death penalty opponents argue that capital punishment isn't effective at doing?
Who do death penalty opponents believe may sometimes be executed?
According to Thompson v. Oklahoma, what was the youngest age at which a person might be executed?
In what year was Thompson v. Oklahoma decided?
In what month and year was Roper v. Simmons decided?
In Roper v. Simmons, how many Supreme Court justices believed juvenile execution to be unconstitutional?
Based on Roper v. Simmons, what is now the minimum age to be executed in the United States?
In what year did Missouri pass a law stating that executions should be inside of or near a jail?
What procedure did Missouri use to execute prisoners in 1919?
In the Missouri of 1919, who handed out passes to witness executions?
In approximately what year did a movement in favor of private executions begin in the US?
Who commuted all state capital sentences in 1986?
Of what state was Toney Anaya governor?
Who was Governor of Ohio in 1991?
How many women were on Ohio's death row in 1991?
In what year did Bob Graham become Governor of Florida?
Along with South Dakota, what state rejected a death penalty abolition bill in 2010?
Who did Idaho execute in 2011?
Who was executed on October 30, 2012?
Since 1976, how many prisoners has Nevada executed?
Since 1976, in what year was a prisoner executed in Wyoming?
How many drugs are used to administer lethal injection?
What lethal injection drug is manufactured by Hospira?
When did Hospira cease to manufacture its lethal injection drug for the United States?
In what country does Hospira manufacture sodium thiopental today?
What EU law forbids products used in torture to be manufactured in the European Union?
Who identified the active substance?
Who developed the method to obtain epinephrine in a pure state?
Who marketed epinephrine?
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?
As an inhaler, what was epinephrine used to treat?
Who developed the method to get epinephrine in it's pure form?
What could epinephrine treat?
When did epinephrine stop being available in the United States?
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?
In what year was epinephrine discovered?
What was the trade name of epinephrine?
Who first discovered epinephrine?
What is epinephrine used to treat?
In what year was Primatene Mist no longer sold in the United States?
Who developed Amphetamine?
Who synthesized Amphetamine for asthma?
What are common side effects of Amphetamine?
When were tricyclic antidepressants developed?
What were some uses for Amphetamine?
Ephedrine was used as an oral medicine for what illness?
In what year was amphetamine first tested on asthma patients?
What was the trade name of amphetamine as a nasal decongestant?
In what year did the American Medical Association approve amphetamine for medical use?
In what decade were tricyclic antidepressants created?
What is diabetes caused from?
Why was insulin therapy delayed?
How can diabetes be induced in dogs?
Before insulin, what was the life expectancy of diabetics?
Who discovered that pancreatic extract reversed symptoms of pancreas removal?
Diabetes is caused by the removal of what organ?
Left untreated, how long were diabetic patients were expected to live?
What could be adjusted in a sample of pancreatic extract to produce purer insulin?
To purify insulin, Banting and Best sought the assistance of what company?
Minkowski and von Mering did surgical tests on what animal?
What is phenobarbital used for?
Who discovered a reaction that induced sleep in dogs?
What sleep aid was marketed in 1904?
What is amphetamine used for today?
Why was barbiturates and amphetamines restricted?
What compound was discovered to induce sleep?
What was the first trade name of diethylbarbituric acid?
What is phenobarbital mainly used to treat today?
In what year was phenobarbital discovered?
What was Veronal used for when Bayer put it on the market?
Who developed Arsphenamine?
What was the first effective treatment for Syphilis?
What complications are associated with Syphilis?
What is Amphetamine's market name?
Where is the Institute of Experimental Therapy located?
Bacterial infections could be treated with medicines containing what kind of dye?
What was the name of the first synthetic bacterial drug?
Arsphenamine became the first treatment for what previously incurable disease?
In what year was arsphenamine discovered?
What was the commercial name of arsphenamine?
When was Morphine and Quinine first available?
Who was the compound named after?
Who came up with the name Morphine?
Where were was Morphine extracted from?
Who is responsible for purification of compounds found in mineral sources?
Morphine was named after what Greek god?
Burroughs-Wellcome is now part of what medical company?
Who discovered morphine?
What is the name of the plant that produces morphine?
Who received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939?
Prontosil is in what drug class?
Who is responsible for creating Prontosil?
What causes Streptococci?
Many deaths occurred before World War II due to what?
What was the name of the first sulfonamine antibiotic?
What award did Domagk receive in 1939?
Anti-infective drugs became more prominent after what war?
Were sulfonamides more or less toxic than arsphenamine?
Streptococci and other pathogens could be treated by what type of antibiotics?
Who created the first rabies vaccine?
How many cases of Diphtheria were there in 1921?
In 1923, what was discovered to be safer to treat Diphtheria Toxin?
Who created a vaccine to treat Japanese Encephalitis?
How many deaths occurred due to Diphtheria?
The rabies vaccine was created in what year?
In what year was the diphtheria vaccine made?
What compound made the diphtheria vaccine safer to use?
Who developed the first encephalitis vaccine? 
What company did Hilleman later work for?
Who manufactured "Elixir Sulfanilamide"?
What was one of the things the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act do?
What year did Congress pass the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act?
What drug killed 100 people in 1937?
What is Diethylene Glycol commonly used for now?
What company manufactured Elixir Sulfanilamide? 
What drug killed over 100 people in 1937?
Diethylene glycol is mainly used today as what liquid?
What law did Congress pass following the Elixir Sulfanilamide incident?
The name "elixir" implied a solution in what liquid?
When was the first effective treatment for Tuberculosis discovered?
50% of tuberculosis-infected people died within 5 years where?
What drug effectively treated Tuberculosis?
Who was Eli Lilly's work based off of?
Where was Tetracyclines discovered?
What was the first treatment for tuberculosis?
What percentage of patients infected with tuberculosis died within 5 years?
In what year was streptomycin discovered?
Many more antibiotics were made following the end of what war?
What company funded the research that led to the discovery of streptomycin?
When was the Polio vaccine created?
Who announced that SV40 was not associated with cancer?
Who identified the SV40 virus?
What was a complication of the SV40 virus?
Who funded the Polio vaccine?
In what year was the polio vaccine created?
Who created the polio vaccine?
What virus caused tumors in most mammals?
Who identified the SV40 virus?
SV40 was present in what vaccine?
How much was the settlement GlaxoSmithKline agree to?
What was one of the causes of the health-care fraud case?
When did GlaxoSmithKline plead guilty?
What drugs were related to a kickback scheme?
What drugs were used for off-label uses?
In what year did GlaxoSmithKline pay a $3 billion dollar settlement?
How much was the largest healthcare fraud case in the US settled for?
What company was sued for promoting medicines for unlicensed uses and bribing doctors?
What is the speculation of the relationship between doctors and the drug industry?
What is the Physician Financial Transparency Report part of?
Where can you obtain information about the Sunshine Act?
What information is collected by Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services?
When did Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services have to start collecting information?
The Physician Financial Transparency Reports was part of what other act?
In what year were Medicaid and Medicare required to disclose information about their relationships with doctors and hospitals?
Where can financial relationships between Medicaid, Medicare and pharmaceutical companies be found?
What is expected when the relationships are made public?
What disease had the biggest decline of deaths?
What was responsible for the decline in spreading diseases?
What period was the report issued in 1958 cover?
Who issued the report in 1958?
What were eight diseases examined for?
How much did the mortality rate of common bacterial infections decline between 1946-1955?
How much did the mortality rate of tuberculosis drop between 1946-1955?
Who issued a report describing the effects of antibiotic developments?
In what year was the FTC's report issued?
How much did treatment for each patient in Africa cost?
Who backed the South African government which caused the case to be dropped?
Who brought litigation to South Africa?
How many signatures were collected by MSF?
When was litigation brought to South Africa?
How many companies sued South Africa for its Medicines Act?
South Africa's Medicines Act allowed for the generic production of what kind of drugs?
How much did ARV drugs cost patients yearly?
How many signatures were collected supporting public health rights?
What Act forbade misbranded drugs?
What caused a Tetanus outbreak?
What act allowed premarket approval for drugs?
When did the Pure Food and Drugs Act get implemented?
Who restricted the federal government's enforcement powers?
What was the name of the law that required premarket approval for producing drugs?
What law banned the interstate distribution of mislabeled food and drugs? 
In what year was the Pure Food and Drugs Act passed?
Who adopted the Doha Declaration?
What did the TRIPS agreement accomplish?
Why are patents criticized?
What did the Doha Declaration do?
When was the Doha Declaration adopted?
What has been accused of reducing access to medicines in developing countries?
The Doha Declaration allows for what ways for monopolies to be bypassed?
When did the World Trade Organization adopt the Doha Declaration?
How much money was recovered through the False Claims?
What are some of the schemes used to defraud the health care system?
What is pharmaceutical fraud?
Who had the biggest fraud case settlement?
What provision rewards "whistle-blowers"?
What kind of fraud financially benefits a drug company?
Who is affected by pharmaceutical fraud?
How much money lost to pharmaceutical fraud was recovered in 2010?
Which act allows whistleblowers to recover money lost from pharmaceutical fraud?
What drugs reduce the risk of death and other events in people with high blood pressure?
Who conducted the review on Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs?
What were Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs used with?
What do ACE inhibitors do?
In what year did Cochrane release the report?
What reduces the risk of new onset kidney diseases and death?
What type of drugs reduced the risk of strokes and heart disease for people with high blood pressure?
In what year was thiazide antihypertensive drugs shown to help those with heart problems?
Who put out a report in 2012?
What has been argued restricted innovation?
What was a recommendations brought about from the report?
What is one thing excessive regulations causes?
What can be used to evaluate new approval processes?
What is excessive drug regulation said to suppress?
In what year was a report made to reduce the burdens of drug development?
What was argued to be holding back new knowledge for treating diseases?
Who discovered Hydralazine?
Why were the researchers recognized in 1975?
Who developed Chlorothiazide?
What is  Chlorothiazide used to treat?
What was the main shortcoming in the drug Hydralazine?
What was the name of the first oral vasodilator?
What is the most used antihypertensive drug today?
Beyer, Sprague, Baer, and Novello received what award in 1975?
In what year was hydralazine discovered?
Chlorothiazide helped reduce the mortality rate among those with what disease?
What act needed provisions?
Who led the congressional hearings?
What were the major issues that needed to be addressed?
What caused a need for more regulation?
When did this push occur?
Congressional hearings emerged addressing revisions to what act?
Who led the Congressional hearings in 1959?
Did the US Congress call for more or less regulation of pharmaceuticals?
What did the first measles prevent in it's first 20 years?
Who originally created the measles vaccine?
How much did the occurrence of serious diseases shortly after the release of the measles vaccine?
When did the Rubella vaccine come out?
Who recreated the measles vaccine?
In what year was the measles vaccine made?
Who helped refine the measles vaccine?
In what year was the mumps vaccine made?
How much did rubella, measles, and mumps infections drop after vaccination?
Measles vaccinations helped prevent how many estimated cases of the illness?
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment become a law?
What did this new law require?
What did the National Academy of Science's study discover?
How long after the National Academy of Science's study did a study on over the counter drugs occur?
What brought up enhancement of drug regulations?
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment became law?
What federal agency regulated the advertising of prescription drugs?
Drugs made between which years had to be tested before going to market?
What percentage of drugs were shown to be ineffective after an FDA study?
How many Americans were given the drug Kevadon?
When was the drug taken off shelves in Germany?
How many newborns were born with issues due to Kevadon?
How was Kevadon distributed to doctors?
Why was this drug pulled off shelves?
In what year was thalidomide banned in Germany?
What adverse effect was thalidomide associated with?
Thalidomide was distributed in the USA by what name?
About how many Americans received thalidomide in a supposed study?
How many newborn American babies were affected by thalidomide?
What law prohibited birth control?
When was Enovid first approved?
What increased due to the availability of birth control?
Who created the first oral birth control?
In 1965, how many women were on the birth control pill?
Discussing contraception sometimes led to prosecution under what laws?
What was the name of the first oral contraceptive?
By 1965, about how many American women were taking Enovid?
When did the FDA approve Enovid?
Birth control was prohibited in most countries before what war?
Who received the Laser-Debakey Clinical Medical Research Aware?
How much money did Merk make in 1995?
How many patients received Zocor?
What study did Merk sponsor in 1994?
What did the study reveal after 5 years?
What was the brand name of simvastatin?
Patients treated with Zocor had their cholesterol reduced by how much?
How much did Zocor reduce the chance of dying from a heart attack?
How much money did Merck make from sales of Zocor and Mevacor?
Endo received what award in 2008?
What is a drug discovery?
Who is usually responsible for early stages of drug discovery?
What is used to manipulate pathways?
What is involved in drug discovery?
What focuses on metabolic pathways?
What is the name of the process in which possible drugs are discovered?
What groups carry out most early drug discoveries?
What kind of technology studies the understanding and manipulation of disease states and pathogens?
Most drugs have been found by isolating what from traditional remedies?
How much does it cost to develop a new drug?
How many approvals of new drugs happen every year?
Who is responsible for approval or rejection of new drugs?
How many drugs were approved in 2007?
Who reported the stable average rate in 2012?
What does NMEs stand for?
How many pharmaceutical drugs were approved on average since 2001?
What is the approximate cost of developing a new drug, including the costs of failure?
What has been the stable approval rate of new drugs?
What drugs are the least expensive to develop?
What accounts for nearly half of the costs to develop drugs?
What is the consequence in the value chain?
What happens when companies outsource?
What is re-formulations of active ingredients referred to?
Investing capital can increase drug development costs by how much?
What kind of companies have had a more important role in drug development?
What firms tend to outsource drug development?
Why was Mevastatin never marketed?
Who discovered Mevastatin?
What is HMG-CoA responsible for producing?
Where did Endo discover ML-236B?
What was discovered in long term studies?
In what year was mevastatin discovered?
Who discovered mevastatin?
What organism produces mevastatin?
What enzyme helps produce cholesterol?
How much did Pfizer settle the illegal marketing suit for?
What drugs were involved in cases of the largest criminal fines?
What was Pfizer accused of illegally marketing?
What companies have been involved with health care fraud cases?
What do illegal marketing cases fall under?
Firms such as Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and AstraZeneca have settled claims under what act?
Zyprexa was owned by what company?
Pfizer was charged with illegally marketing what antipsychotic drug?
Pfizer settled the Geodon lawsuit for how much money?
Who were some of the companies that encouraged the interactions between doctors and the pharmaceutical industry?
When did the article come out about the importance of interactions?
What was the reason behind these interactions?
What was believed to have created a financial conflict of interest?
Who printed the article about the importance of interactions?
What publication had an article about the importance of pharmaceutical industry-physician interactions in 2015?
When was the editorial published?
Did major healthcare organizations support or discourage interactions between doctors and industries?
Who conduced an investigation on doctors?
Billions of dollars have been paid by which companies?
How much was discovered to have been paid to doctors by drug companies?
What was the reason these companies have to pay fines?
How many doctors have been paid by varies companies?
A ProPublica study found that some doctors were being paid how much money for speeches?
Half of the top earners were mostly in what field?
Drug manufacturers paid off doctors a total of how much money?
Why are collaborative agreements important?
How do large corporations show vertical integration?
What are large companies relying on outside organizations for?
What are smaller organizations responsible for?
What type of integration do large corporations often do?
What type of integration do smaller organizations do?
What type of agreements are made to research potential new drugs?
What type of organizations are multinational corporations increasingly rely on?
Who is the core guide?
Who is responsible for approving drugs in the United Kingdom?
After an approval in the United States, when does an approval occur in the United Kingdom and other countries?
Who decides how NHS will allow drugs?
Who does the evaluations for drugs in the United Kingdom?
What UK firm approves pharmaceutical drugs?
What UK organization evaluates drugs? 
What firm in England and Wales decides if the NHS allows drugs?
What is the name of the core guide for pharmacists and clinicians?
What is subject to the Orphan Drug Act?
What is given to companies who develop drugs for "orphan diseases"?
Why are these companies rewarded?
What size of disease populations are subject to the Orphan Drug Act?
What is one financial benefit to researching orphan drugs?
What is the length of time of market exclusivity of an orphan drug?
What is a term for rare diseases in some territories?
Who argued against regulators?
Who argued that drug regulators were greater serving the interests of the drug companies than the patients?
The business friendships between which parties have been criticized?
Goldacre argued that which party didn't require that new drugs be improved at all?
NICE decides the availability of drugs in which two countries?
What is the name of the organization in Scotland that decides the availability of drugs?
What threshold must a drug pass before it is approved?
How much money did the top ten bestselling drugs make in 2013?
What was the name of the top-selling anti-inflammatory drug in 2013?
What was the bestselling drug in history?
How much money did Lipitor make before the patent expired?
In what year did Pfizer's patent over Lipitor expire?
How long do drug exclusivity rights usually last?
Governments grant permission to market drugs after how many years?
What enables a drug's owner to recover R&D costs?
What kind of drug is produced by competitors once a patent expires?
What decade was the pharmaceutical industry's "golden era"?
The safety and efficacy of new drugs must be approved by what organization in the US?
What type of filing is used before beginning human trials?
How many phases of human trials may be done after IND approval?
What type of application is filed after completing three phases of human trials?
What type of risk assessment results in approving the drug to go on the market?
"Drug reps" are usually hired by what type of firms?
What law regulates drug marketing in the US?
Who do drug reps market to?
Drug reps have been accused of giving what to health professionals?
Drug marketers have hired who as paid consultants?
What publications can drug ads be commonly found?
What is the difference between a pesticide and a plant protection product?
What is the purpose of a pesticide?
What are pesticides most commonly used for?
What can pesticides protect plants from?
What item commonly used in hospitals, schools and offices is a pesticide?
What are three pests pesticides target?
Are pesticides chemical or biological agents?
What are possible cons of pesticides?
What are pesticides meant to prevent?
What is one way to group pesticides?
Give three examples of target organisms of pesticides.
What are the two types of biopesticides?
Which type of pesticides have seen rapid growth in development?
Organochlorine hydrocarbons effect what balance of the nerve fiber?
Why was the use of organochlorine hydrocarbons ended?
What type of herbicide selectively kills broad leef weeds?
What essential plan funtion is interrupted by triazines?
Organophospates and carbamates cause which symptoms?
What is one way you could group pesticides?
What is the main way that peticides perform their function?
In which direction do systemic pesticide generally travel through a plant?
Which parts of a plant do systemic pesticides generally attack?
Pesticides can be used to stop the spread of what dieseases?
What sort of pesticides would you find in ponds and lakes?
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in the US?
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in Canada?
What kind of pesticide is DDT?
Why have DDTs been banned in some areas?
Is DDT 100% guaranteed to work?
How may species have been found to be resistant to DDT?
On estimate how many megatonnes of pesticides were used between 2006 and 2007?
What amount of conventional pesticide use does the agricultural sector account for?
 Pesticides contain at least how many ingredients?
How maney pesticides are offered for sale in the US?
What do monetary savings in crops from the use of pesticide amount to?
What amount is spent annualoy on pesticides?
How are consumers able to benefit from saved crops?
In which area do pesticides creat jobs?
How is the health of the general publis affected by pesticides?
Can pesticides have a serious effect on people?
What is one of the most serious effects of exposure to pesticides?
What is thought to possibly cause neurobehavioral alterations?
How many workers in agriculture die a year from severly poisining pesticides in developing countries?
What careers put people in danger of being exposed to pesticide poisining?
In developing countries, how many workers are exposed to mild pesticide poisining?
Why are 99% of pesticide related deaths in underdeveloped countries?
What pecentage of sprayed pesticides affect the wrong species?
What is affected when pesticides don't reach their target?
What is it called when pesticides are caught in the wind and carried to unintended areas?
Pesticides contribute to what sort of pollution?
What is the effect of pesticide drift?
Why are hydrocarbon pesticides not excreted?
How are levels of pesticides higher going up the food chain?
The movement of pesticides from wawrme to cooler climates is called what?
How could pesticides travel over hundreds of miles?
What feature is wanted to assist with reducing negative impacts of pesticides?
How else can negative impacts of pesticides be reduced?
What is one way by which pesticides lose their efficacy?
What may slow pesticide movement?
What is one thing that can be used in place of pesticides?
What natural product can be used to control pests?
Why are alternative methods of pest control gaining popularity?
What agency has offered acceptance of safer pesticides?
What is one non chemical way of dealing with pests?
What does IPM stand for?
How can the location and amount of insects be changed?
What is one thing that can be used to pull pests?
What is the name of the process by which pests are attracted and repelled using IPM. 
How much was Sweden able to lower thier pesticide usage?
What other country has reduced its pesticide usage?
What natural substance has been found to effectively increase crop yields
What amount of gain in crops can be contributed to application of composted yard waste?
What is one type of pesticide?
How long may it take for persistent pesticides to be broken down?
What quality caused DDT to build up in various organisms?
What is one way to classify pesticides?
What are sulfonyureas commonly used for?
Nicosulfuron, triflusulfuron methyl and chlorsulfuron can be classified as what type of pesticides?
The restriction of what enzyme allows broad-spectrum herbicides to kill plants?
The amount of material used as a crop protection measure decreased from 1kg/ha in what year to its current 1%?
Is the trade of pesticides and pesticide treated goods limited to the United States?
What commitee deals with differences in rules governing the use of pesticides among different countries?
When was the international code which governs the distribution and use of pesticides established?
How recently were voluntary standards of pesticide regulation updated?
What country has attempted to better the controls of pesticide exchanges?
What is one agency who is trying to help make the trade of pesticides safer?
What is one important thing that should be present when countries are trading with pesticides?
Are these agencies a requirement in the countries where they exist?
What is one measure taken to keep society safe from improper pesticide use?
What is a choice that users of pesticides can make that will lower risks?
What is one country that has sucessfully used IPM?
Biological and botanical derivatives have what positive effects?
Who has the ability to make the choice of using less harmful pesticides?
What is a measure of pesticides determined in EPA studies?
Who is protected by EPA regulations?
Pesticides are inspected often to make sure they meet up to date safety regulations from what period of time.
How often are pesticides produced more recently evaluated for safety?
How could someone learn more about how to safely use and handle an unknow pesticide?
What are pesticides that are thought to be extremely dangerous called?
What would qualify someone to use restricted use pesticides?
 The EPA or other groups who govern pesticide use may inspect what?
Agencies who regulate the environment exists in what regional capacities?
What is the earliest records of humans using pesticides?
What was used as a insecticide in the 17th century?
What decade did herbicides become common?
Who can be credited with finding out DDT is useful as an insecticide?
What is the source used to exact nicotine sulfate?
When were laws first created to regulate pesticides?
What might someone knowledgable about the history of pesticides call ther period of the 1940s and 1950s?
When did America establish the Environmental Protection Agency?
Countries which are established use what amount of pesticides?
Trends about use of pesticides have been published from which country?
What was Unicode published as?
What was unicode developed in conjunction with?
What is the most recent version of Unicode?
Who maintains the Unicode Standard? 
Unicode contains how many thousands of characters in its repertoire? 
What are the most commonly used encodings of Unicode?
What does UTF-8 use in terms of bytes? 
What does UTF-16 expand? 
What type of code does UCS-2 use?
How are two 16-bit units used? 
What is the aim of Unicode?
Traditional character encodings don't allow what type of computer processing?
What is multilingual computer processing?
Bilingual computer processing uses what characters?
What is the major limitation of traditional character encodings?
What were the first 256 code points of Unicode made identical to? 
Why were the first 256 code points made identical to ISO-8859-1?
What does the "fullwidth forms" section of code points encompass?
What are the CJK languages referenced?
When was a surrogate character mechanism implemented in Unicode 2.0?
Why was a surrogate character mechanism implemented?
What are some characters not originally intended for Unicode? 
Why are some foreign characters rarely used? 
Why was the Unicode 2.0 codespace increased? 
What are the General Categories of Unicode?
What type of use is the General Category not helpful for?
What is the General Category in Unicode?
How many General Category properties does each code point have?
What exists within the main Unicode categories? 
What are code points in the range U+D800-U+DBFF known as? 
What are code points in the range U+DC00-U+DFFF known as? 
what is another name for a high-surrogate code point? 
what is another name for a low-surrogate code point? 
What is known as a character's scalar value? 
What is an ogonek? 
How does Unicode encode characters?
How are some abstract characters represented in Unicode?
What policy guaranteed that characters have a unique and immutable name?
What happens when a name is defective or misleading?
How long has this name immutability been guaranteed? 
Who was Unicode developed in conjunction with?
What does Unicode share a character repertoire with?
What includes topics like bitwise encoding, collation, and rendering?
What do the two standards differ in? 
What does the print on demand, core version not include? 
When was the Unicode Standard first published? 
When was the latest version, Unicode 8.0, released?
What was the last major version of Unicode to be published in book form? 
What year was it announced that only the core specification for Unicode would be printed in physical form?
Michael Everson, Rick McGowan, and Ken Whistler make up what group?
What does the Unicode Roadmap Commmittee do? 
What proposal has been made for the Mayan script? 
Where does the Unicode Roadmap Committee post information on these scripts?
How many mapping methods does Unicode define?
What are the two mapping methods that Unicode defines?
What do numbers in the names of the encodings indicate? 
What are the most commonly used encodings? 
What does UCS stand for?
What does BOM stand for? 
What specifies the BOM?
what is the code point of the BOM?
What is U+UFFE the result of? 
What is the UTF-8 standard? 
Byte order marks are forbidden in protocols using what standard? 
Why is it possible to distinguish UTF-8 from other protocols?
How is UTF-32 widely used? 
What programming language uses UTF-32 as internal representation of characters? 
what version of python can be used with UTF-32? 
What combinations does unicode contain in normal use?
How is the latin small letter e represented in Unicode?
How is the accent added to the small latin e? 
What precomposed character represents the small latin e with an accent? 
The CJK ideographs comprise simpler elements called what in English?
Why have ideographs been unable to be simplified like Hangul?
What would be the benefit of Unicode decomposing  ideographs?
What does ACE stand for? 
Who created ACE?
When was ACE created? 
Who created OpenType?
Who created Graphite? 
where are instructions embedded to tell fonts how to output sequences? 
Can real stacking be accomplished? 
what is a solution to the placement of combining marks? 
What subset of Unicode is used by Windows? 
What are MES-1, MES-2, AND MES-3A AND MES-3B part of? 
What subset includes every character in MES-1 and WGL-4? 
How long has Microsoft Windows supported WGL-4? 
MES-1 uses what scripts only? 
What does rendering software display when it can't process a Unicode character? 
What is the code for the Unicode replacement character? 
What is the name of Apple's font? 
What company uses the Unicode Fallback font? 
What does SIL's Unicode Fallback font display when it can't display a character properly? 
What is the dominant scheme for internal processing? 
What is Unicode available through Windows on? 
What was the two-byte precursor to UTF-16? 
What is used almost exclusively for building new information processing systems? 
What is recommended for email transmission of Unicode? 
Where are the details of the two mechanisms for email transmission specified? 
How many different mechanisms does MIME define for encoding Unicode in email? 
How many fonts support the majority of Unicode's character repertoire? 
What are the fonts that support Unicode referred to as? 
Unicode-based fonts are normally focused on supporting what? 
What is the code for separating lines? 
What is the code for separating paragraphs? 
How is newline normalization accomplished in Mac OS X? 
How does the newliine normallization format work? 
Why has Unicode been criticized for not separately encoding forms of kanji?
What is TRON? 
What perception does the unification of glyphs cause? 
what tables of OpenType allow permit the selection of alternative glyph representations?
Where is information provided to designate which character form to select? 
How does modern font technology address the issue of depicting a Han character in alternate glyph representations? 
Unicode was designed for a round trip format conversion to and from what? 
How many encoding forms are there for Korean Hangul?
Since what version can already existing characters no longer be added to the standard? 
What kind of mappings must be provided between characters in existing legacy character sets and those in Unicode?
A lack of consistency between what earlier Japanese encodings and unicode led to mismatches?
what is the fullwidth tilde character code in Microsoft Windows?
How many code points are tamil and Devanagari allocated? 
What is another word for ligatures? 
What is the ISCII standard? 
What standard did Unicode inherit involving a Thai language? 
Why has Thai alphabet support been criticized? 
How are the Thai characters ordered incorrectly? 
How are characters with diacritical marks represented? 
What encoding does Charis SIL use? 
What is the issue with underdots and their placement? 
Characters with what marks can be displayed as a single character or a decomposed sequence? 
How should the characters with the macron and acute be displayed? 
What drives the wider acceptance of renewable energy technologies?
Denmark has a committment to 100 percent renewable energy by what year?
How many countries now have renewable energy policies?
How much was the total investment in renewable energy in 2012?
Why did the total investment in renewable energy go down in 2012?
What  six were the top countries for investment in recent years?
Who has shown support for ambitious renewable energy goals?
What group polled the 27 EU member states in 2010?
The goal was to increase the share of renewable energy in the EU by 20 percent in what year?
By the end of 2011, total renewable power capacity worldwide exceeded what number?
Renewables contributed what percentage to our energy consumption?
Renewables contributed what percentage to our electricity generation?
Who was the UN under-secretary in 2011?
Between what years did worldwide renewable energy capacity grow at rates of 10 to 60 percent annually?
Who is Achim Steiner?
Which group projected that solar plant may produce most of the world's electricity within 50 years?
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet most of the world's demand for electricity by what year?
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet how much of the world's energy needs by 2060?
Who led the world in renewable energy production in 2013?
Since what year has production of solar cells in China expanded 100-fold?
What is the main driver of reduced costs?
What is getting cheaper as a result of technilogical change?
As of what year have there been substantial reductions in the cost of solar and wind technologies?
What group stated that "cost reductions in critical technologies, such as wind and solar, are set to continue?"
What is the most economic solution for new grid-connected capacity in areas with good resources?
What happens as the scope of economically viable applications increases?
What are now often the most economic solution for new generating capacity?
What is one problem with biomass?
What can be economically competetive but may still require deployment support?
What is a fully maturing technology which offer a ready disposal mechanismm?
What is the term referring to electricity generated by hydropower?
What is the most widely used form of renewable energy?
Hydroelectricity accounts for what percentage of global electricity generation?
Electricity production is expected to increase by what percentage each year for the next 25 years?
Hydropower is produced in how many countries?
Which country is the largest hydroelectricity producer?
What is the average cost of electricity from a hydro plant larger than 10 megawatts?
How many hydroelectricity plants are larger than 10 GW?
What was the geothermal capacity in 1975?
What was the geothermal capacity in 2008?
In the Phillipines, geothermal represented what percentage of the total power mix at the end of 2008?
Where have the majority of photovoltaic power stations been built?
Where is Charanka Solar Park?
Where is the Agua Caliente Solar Project located?
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm currently under construction?
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm?
Who is building The Califoria Valley Solar Ranch?
Global wind power installations increased by how much in 2010?
China has how much wind power installed?
In Denmark, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
In Spain, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
In Germany, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
How is the wind industry in the USA able to produce more power at lower cost?
How tall are new wind turbines that are being built in Indiana, Michigan and Ohio?
Wind turbines in the USA can now compete with what type of fuel?
Prices have fallen as low as what price?
Where is the Ivanpah Solar Power Facility located?
What is the world's largest solar-thermal power plant project currently under construction?
Where is the PS20 solar power tower located?
Nearly all gasoline sold in the U.S. is mixed with what percentage of ethanol?
What act calls for 7.5 billion US gallons of biofuels to be used annually by 2012?
Name one company that sells flexible-fuel cars?
What can be made from plant matter composed primarily of inedible celllose fibers thta form the stems and branches of most plants?
What are potential sources of cellulosic biomass?
What is a promising cellulose source that can be sustainably produced in many regions?
As of 2008, geothermal power development was underway in more than how many countries?
What is one new technology attributed to the growth of geothermal power?
What is operational in the USA, Australia, Germany, France and The United Kingdom?
The PV industry has seen drops in module prices since what year?
What is a sign that further price reductions are likely in coming years?
What cost is often regarded as marking the achievment of grid parity for PV?
Why do utility operators often reject renewable resources?
Why do consumers often ignore renewable power systems?
Who argued that some of the problems facing renewable energy are more about culture and institutions than engineering and science?
Lester Brown states that the market does not incorporate what?
Who believes that the market does not value nature's service adequately?
What can help over come the problems with the market?
What involves lowering income taxes while raising levies?
Several Western European companies are shifting taxes in a process known as what?
What is the purpose of tax shifting?
Besides tax shifting, what is another need?
What was the result of publicly funded links among computers in government labs and reserach institutes?
What helped create the modern wind power industry?
As of 2012, what accounts for about half of new nameplate electrical capacity?
What involves the deployment of three generations of renewable energy technologies dating back more than 100 years?
Name one second-generation technology that is market ready.
What group advocates leveling the playing field?
How does the International Solar Energy Society propse to level the playing field?
What is the key to stabilizing the earth's climate?
What country is reducing its coal subsidy?
What country has been increasing its support for the fossil fuel and nuclear industries?
Some countries have phased out all subsidies for what substance?
Setting national renewable energy targets can be an important part of what?
The European Union has prescribed an indicative renewable energy target of what percent?
Name one outher country with defined national or regional target?
What determines the extent to which renewable energy is to be incorporated into a country's generation mix?
Who has the authority to carry out a number of functions that havae implications for the feasiblity of renewable energy projects?
Why have energy sector regulators become a key facilitator of renewable energy investments?
What is the driving force behind voluntary green electricity within the EU?
What states that EU Member States must ensure that the origin of electricity produced from renewables can be guaranteed?
In the US, what is the main tool to track and stimulate voluntary actions?
What made a strong economic case for investing in low carbon technologies?
In what year did a number of events push renewable energy up the political agenda?
What is driving increasing rates of investment in the renewable energy industry?
What helped the industry weather the 2009 economic crisis better than other sectors?
What suggests that the commercialization of clean energy will hellp countries deal with economic malaise?
Which company became invovled in a political controversy?
What company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy?
What plays a major role in the energy mix of many countries?
What is becoming increasingly economic in both developing and devloped countries?
As of 2012, prices for what commodity continued to drop?
Who is United Nations' Secretary-General?
Ban Ki-moon states that renewable energy has the ability to lift the poorest nations to new levels of prosperity?
Who is chair of UN Energy?
Who is chairman of Bank of America?
In 2012, solar electricity consumption increased by what percentage?
Use of wind power in 2012 increased by what percentage?
How much was the worldwide investment in solar power in 2012?
Analysts expect the market to triple by what year?
In what year did investment in renewables exceed fossils?
What motivated the incentive to use 100 percent renewable energy?
How many nations already have renewable energy contributing to more than 20 percent of energy supply?
Who developed a series of stabilization wedges?
Who is a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford University?
What is a barrier to implementing the renewable energy plan?
Who stated that energy costs with a wind, solar, water system should be similar to today's energy costs?
Jacobson says producing all new energy with wind power, solar power and hydropower is feasible by what year?
Why is renewable energy an attractive option?
In what country is the National Research Council located?
Sufficient domestic reneewable resources exist for what reason?
What makes up Education?
What methods make up Education?
Where does education usually take place under?
What occurred after the Fall of Rome with literature?
What happened with education  during the Early Middle Ages?
What did these early schools during the Middle Ages evolve into?
What was the name of the famous school during the high middle ages?
Where does formal education take place?
What are some of the sets or ideals most school systems follow?
Who guides the students in a formal environment?
Whats the typical age range for pre-school?
What are pre-schools also known as?
In what country is Kindergarten a term used for primary education?
What is another term used for Primary education?
What does primary school consist of?
What is the name of the orgination who is striving to get all the countries on the same path with primary education?
What does secondary education comprise of?
What two examples were given of what "postsecondary" or "higher" education?
When does secondary schooling typically take place?
What is the purpose of secondary education?
When did secondary education emerge in the United States?
Why was secondary school introduced in the U.S?
Who benefited from secondary schools?
What was another name used for Higher Education?
What is High Education?
What does Tertiary education include?
What does University education include?
What are usually Universities made up of?
What type of University would Yale fall under?
What was a rule for disabled people in the past for education?
Who denied children with disabilities to be unable to attend a public school?
Who were some of these early physicians?
What would Special Education usually only apply to in the early years of schooling in the U.S?
What is another term used for Special Education Services?
When were public schools become more and more developed?
What are some examples of alternative schools?
Whos educatgion approach was introduced in Germany in the 19th century and is used in most Kindergartens?
Who from Switzerland was an influential in education?
Who were the founders of progressive education?
What makes up Indigenous education?
In which two systems can Indigenous education be used?
What is one of the main purposes for Indigenous education?
Who defines informal learning?
Where does informal learning occur?
What does informal leaning usually consist of amongst people who take this route of learning?
Where does informal learning usually take place?
What is not necessary for informal learning?
What falls under the informal learning umbrella?
When was the 'education through recreation" applied to childhood?
When was the concept of 'education through recreation' changed and expanded?
What changed when the concept was broadened?
What does Auto didacticism generally mean?
When can you become an Autodidact?
Which famous U.S president was a Autodidact?
Which famous inventor was a Autodidact?
In what year did e-learning jump 14 times over traditional leaning?
Which form of education looks to be the dominant form i the coming years?
What has been a constant issue with education for as long as education has been around itself?
Which type of schooling can be most expensive?
What is not as common in open education?
Which University offers conventional degrees? 
What do most open education sources offer?
What does Universal Primary Education belong to?
What is one issue that hurts Universal Primary Education?
Which organization has discovered corruption in the educator sector?
What has come from similarities in systems?
Which programfacilitates the exchange students across Europe?
Which group provides opportunities for Eastern Europe and Asia exchange students?
What does LCPS stand for?
What was the reason for the polarisation for affordable schooling?
Where are these types of school spreading across?
What are some of the claims being pointed towards education inequality?
Who do students often blame for their education short comings?
What happens when someone tries to improve education?
What is the discrepancy between Developed and less developed countries?
What resources do developed countries have better access to?
What is common in developed countries?
What is one good trait about students from developed countries?
What use of technology can greatly supplement how teachers teach in the classroom?
What do students also need occasionally before putting blame on teachers?
What is the meaning of Education psychology?
What is also used interchangeably  with Education psychology?
Who are likely to be identified as educational psychologist?
What is educational psychology concerned with?
How can Educational psychology in part be understood?
How is the method of educational psychology have some relation to medicine and biology?
Where does education psychology draw from?
In universities where are the departments of educational psychology normally held?
What is important for a student in education?
What does education increase in a student?
What is intelligence at 53 more closely related to?
Who focused on identifying stimuli that can influence learning?
Who also along with Dunn recommended other teaching studies?
Who created the Type Delineator?
What do some theories believe?
What should be included in effective teaching?
What can Philosophy education be when we talk about the process?
What defines Philosophy education?
What fields make up field education and a field applied philosophy?
What is another term used for instructors?
What are the main subjects that are covered by the instructor?
In the United States what is considered the single most important factor in a child's education?
What is the theory behind Empirical analyses?
What has been argued about high rates in education?
What is greatly needed with technology transfer when it relates to education?
Literature on how earnings and how it relates to schooling was greatly influenced by who?
This view of how schooling and earnings has sparked a lot of studies, but what else has it brought up?
What was one of the main concerns of this literature on how schooling and earnings?
Who are Windows main operating system competitors?
What new security features does Windows 8 have?
What USB version is Windows 8 compatible with?
What services does the Windows Store provide?
What can be found on the Start screen?
What about Windows 8 was well received?
What were the perceived problems with the new Windows 8 user interface?
How many Windows 8 licenses were purchased by January 2013?
Who is Windows division president?
When did Microsoft start creating Windows 8?
What is jupiter?
Where were the Windows 8 plans initially announced?
Who is Microsofts CEO?
What does BSoD stand for?
When was Milestone 1 divulged?
What was special about Milestone 1?
When was Milestone 2 divulged?
When was Build 7959 divulged?
What 3 versions of the build did Microsoft first release?
What developer tools did the build have?
How many downloads occured in the first 12 hours?
When did the developer preview expire?
When was the Developer preview initially intended to expire?
When was the beta version of Windows 8 made available to the public?
Who is the Windows Manager?
How many things were altered after developer version release?
How many times was the Consumer Preview downloaded in the first 24 hours?
When was the Consumer Preview set to expire?
When was the Release Preview revealed to consumers?
When was the release preview set to expire?
What were the main components of the Release preview?
What was the build number of the Windows 8 Release Preview?
When was the Windows 8 Release Preview accidentally revealed?
When did Windows 8 manufacturing begin?
When was Microsoft supposed to officially launch Windows 8?
What was the final build Microsoft decided to manufacture?
When were Software Assurance consumers allowed access to Windows 8?
What version of Windows 8 is Enterprise N?
How many things did Microsoft alter after Release Preview?
When was the General Availablity Cumulative Update provided?
How are system improvements released through Windows 8?
What name did Windows Explorer change to?
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 8?
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 95?
What is the name of the character Microsoft used to make Windows 8 seem more personable?
When did Microsoft begin promoting Windows 8?
How many pop up stores did Microsoft set up to help promote Windows 8?
When was the first game of the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals?
Who did Windows 8 mock in their television campaign?
What was the name of the Windows 8 advertising campaign?
What three things did the Windows Everywhere campaign emphasize on?
What happens during Hybrid Boot mode?
What are the benefits of USB 3.0?
What is the point of near field communications?
What is Windows to Go?
What features were added to the lock screen?
What replaced the Windows Explorer comman bar?
What is the new name of Windows Explorer?
What does file history make possible?
What did the update of operation dalog boxes help with?
What is the point of using different colors on a heat map?
What changes were made to the BSoD?
What are some of the process type groups Windows 8 implemented?
How can users find out more about obscure Windows 8 processes?
What new security features did Windows 8 provide?
What were the new security features in Windows 8 geared at?
What options do Parental controls provide?
What new recovery options did Windows 8 implement?
When was the first Windows 8 patch sent out?
How does secure boot help avert boot process infections?
What requirements do Microsoft certified devices have?
What must always be enable in ARM-based Windows RT devices?
What is SkyDrive?
When was Facebook support turned off?
What features does Xbox Live hub offer?
What Xbox apps were bundled together?
What service options does Windows online now offer?
What forms is Internet Exploer 10 available as?
What limitations were put on Adobe flash to begin with?
Where can Adobe Flash now be used?
What improvements were made to Internet Explorer?
What does airplone mode do?
Where can Carrier account management systems be found?
What are some connection settings in Windows 8?
What registers the insertion of a SIM card?
Who is Jensen Harris?
What apps can one expect the People app to match with?
What apps can one expect the Photos app to match with?
What makes Windows Store apps unique?
What are contracts?
What programming languages does Windows Runtime work with?
What makes Windows apps binary code compatible?
What does compiling components as Windows Runtime make possible?
What kind of environment provides Windows apps extra security?
Where can Windows 8 install apps from?
How do devices with Windows 8 Enterprise attain apps outside of the Windows Store?
What other devices can sideload apps?
What does immersive app stand for?
What are apps after the introduction of Windows 8 called?
Who is Soma Somasegar?
When did Windows Store apps become the real term for the apps?
What code did Windows 8 change to?
What term did Microsoft give to its exception privilige for web browsing?
What different options did the desktop version have?
Which two browsers promised to develop Metro-style versions of their browsers?
What does Chromes version for Windows 8 do?
What does Firefox's version for Windows 8 do?
When was Firefox's version of Windows 8 made accesible?
What is found on the Start Screen?
What do live tiles do?
What is the primary function of the PC Settings app? 
Where can advanced settings options be found?
What is the new System User interface built on?
What is charms?
What is the purpose of charms?
How is an active list of apps accessed?
What does swiping from the left edge of the screen do?
How is the traditional desktop evironment opened?
Why was the ability to play DVD-Video taken off of Windows Media Player?
What does the Pro Pack do?
Which main feature was removed in Windows 8?
What backup element is still found on Windows 8?
How is Backup and Restore opened?
What does :76 Shadow Copy do?
What is :74 used for? 
Why did Microsoft decrease the required resoultion for tablets?
What is a convertible form factor? 
How does a convertible become a tablet?
What did Microsoft change the tablet resolution requirements on March 12, 2013?
How many Windows 8 editions are there?
What extras does Windows 8 Pro have?
What extras do Windows 8 Enterprise have?
How would one get Windows RT?
During it's launch how much was a Windows 8 upgrade?
What is the Windows 8 price?
What is the Windows 8 Pro price?
Which PC owners could purchase a Windows 8 Pro uprgrade for $14.99?
How much was the Windows Media Center add-on during the original Windows 8 promotion?
What restrictions do Windows upgrade licenses have?
What did Windows offer in place of a full version of the software?
What did the System Builder SKU take the place of?
What does OEM stand for?
What did the Personal Use License allow?
What replaced Windows 8?
What is the primary difference in Windows 8.1? 
What exemption was removed from Windows 8.1?
What is Windows 8.1 with Bing?
What architecture types does Windows 8 support?
What is 16-bit support intended for?
When was x86 2nd generation created?
How does the online Windows installer know which version to install?
What Windows version is compatible with ARM processors?
What apps work on Windows RT?
Why does Windows RT only work with apps included with the system?
Who condemned Microsoft for requiring devices to have secure boot enabled by default?
What resolution did Microsoft come to in their certificiation guidelines?
Who is Tony Mangefeste?
What ideology does Microsoft follow?
Who criticized Microsofts closed platform Windows Store?
Who created Minecraft?
Who developed Steam?
What company is Rob Pardo associated with?
What was the main reasoning behind the creation of the Windows Store?
Who equated windos 8 as the first desktop operating system that understand what a computer is supposed to do?
Why did Pierce give the Start Screen such glowing reviews?
Which improvements were most well regarded?
Who else uses a closed distribution platform?
What makes the Windows 8 interface difficult to use?
Who said the Windows 8 interface was clumsy and impractical?
What kind of feedback has Windows 8 received?
What is IDC?
What is the decline in PC sales attributed to?
How much of a decrease in sales have Windows devices experienced?
While Windows sales went down, which company experienced an increase in sales?
What percent of tablets were running Windows in Q1 2013/
What was Androids market share in 2013?
What was teh iOS market share in 2013?
What does Strategy Analytics say Windows tablets are lacking?
When did Windows 8 surpass Windows Vistas market share?
What changes did Microsoft make to its certification requirements in March 2013?
Why did Microsoft change the tablet resolution minimum? 
How many licenses did Microsoft sell in the first six months?
What controlled the small form tablet market at this time?
When did Microsoft make the existence of Windows 8.1 with Bing OEM SKU official?
When did Microsoft remove license fees on device screens less than 9 inches?
When did Windows 8 decrease the price of Windows 8 for devices that cost less than $250?
What was the benefit of Windows 8.1 with Bing?
When did the Chinese government ban the purchase of Windows 8 products?
Why did the Chinese government ban Windows 8 based products?
What market share did Windows XP have in Chine?
Who claimed that the Windows 8 would allow the US Government to spy on its users?
What does CCTV stand for?
What is the name of the Chinese social network?
Who claimed that the Window 8 OS could gather sensitive user information?
Where did Yang Min practice as a computer scientiest?
When was Windows 8.1 introduced?
When did Microsoft release the beta version of Windows 8.1?
When did MSDN and TechNet users gain access to Windows 8.1?
What search engine was added in Windows 8.1?
How did the Windows 8.1 upgrade enhance desktop startup?
What main feature was added back to the desktop?
How many apps did the WIndows 8.1 update allow to be snapped onto a signular display?
What is the USAF?
How many uniformed services are there in the United States?
When did the USAF split from the US Army?
What act formed the USAF?
What is one of the functions of the USAF?
How many departments are there in the Department of Defense?
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force currently report to? 
What branch of the government must confirm the President's appointment of the Secretary of the Air Force? 
Who serves as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff?
Who assigns combat missions to the Air Force? 
How many core functions did the Air Force reduce its duties down to recently? 
What do these core functions of the Air Force express? 
What are not considered doctrinal constructs of the Air Force? 
What is the mission set of the Air Force called that includes nuclear strike operations? 
How does the Air Force promote security to its allies? 
What is the US Air Force prepared to do to support its allies? 
What do potential adversaries threaten that the US Air Force prevents? 
What is the definition of a nuclear strike? 
What action by the US Air Force would deter adversaries from threatening US Security? 
Who has the authorization in the US to terminate a conflict?
What organization does the US Air Force support on its missions? 
What is one of the areas where the US Air Force might operate its missions? 
What ensures the safety of nuclear operations? 
What is the mission of the NDO in regards to nuclear security? 
What is a Broken Arrow incident in nuclear security? 
What is one of the five functions of NDO support? 
What other US departments does the Air Force coordinate with for nuclear security? 
What does the abbreviation OCA stand for? 
What is the function or definition of the OCA according to JP 1-02?
OCA is the preferred method of defeating what kind of attacks? 
What is one of the important functions of the OCA in dealing with attacks? 
What does the abbreviation DCA stand for? 
What sort of airspace is the DCA designed to protect?
What is active defense, according to the functions of the DCA? 
What kind of missile defense does active defense protect against, according to the DCA?
What is one of the many ways the DCA utilizes passive defense to protect from enemy attacks? 
What is the dominance in space of one force over another? 
What does Space Superiority encompass? 
Who does space superiority ensure freedom of action in space for? 
What areas does Space Superiority operate in? 
What is the definition of Space Control according to the US and its allies? 
What is one of the areas of operation that space control serves to protect? 
What is the operational environment that Space Control depends on? 
Who responds with the employment of capabilities where there is a threat?
What is the definition of CND?
What does Cyberspace defense include?
What is one of the things that Cyberspace defense highly dependent on? 
What branch of the military is in charge of Cyberspace defense? 
What division ensures the Air Force's information integrity and availability? 
What is ability is critical in Cyberspace Supports mission?
What important networks is it the function of Cyberspace support to protect?
What techniques does the Cyberspace Support branch of the Air Force use? 
What is the definition of Command and Control in the Air Force operations? 
Who is in charge of the Command and Control operations? 
What is one of the C2 related functions that the Command and Control mission of the Air Force uses? 
What are the main objectives of the Command and Control initiative? 
What agency is in charge of intelligence requirements? 
What is one of the ways that the Air Force uses Planning and Directing in its operations? 
Who benefits from the process analysis and dissemination of this information? 
What are Special Operations? 
What are the goals of Special Operations? 
What kind of forces can Special Operations missions employ? 
What is one of the ways that Special Operations is different from conventional methods?
What is the definition of Airlift according to the Air Mobility Operations? 
What objectives does Airlift support? 
What does this US presence represent during a humanitarian crisis? 
How does the US employ the global reach capability of airlift? 
Who coordinates the deployment of thee Aeromedical Evacuation? 
What is the movement of patients who need medical attention called?
Where does the Aeromedical Evacuation team transport casualties? 
Who operates and is able to conduct airland missions? 
What does the abbreviation PR stand for in terms of the US military?
What is the definition of a Personnel Recovery mission? 
What is one of the ways that PR uses its capabilities in a crisis? 
What are the types of international duties of the PR mission? 
What are programs that are designed to help with natural or manmade disaters? 
What kind of Humanitarian assistance is supplied by the US Forces?
What kinds of endemic conditions do the Human Assistance Operations entail? 
Who is the Humanitarian support intended to help? 
What does Building Partnerships relate to in the Air Force? 
What are the goals of the Building Partnership interactions?
What sort of inter-personal relationships does Building Partnerships encourage? 
What is the major goal of Building Partnerships in these deeds and actions?
What are Airmen expected to be competent in for these Building Partnerships missions?
Who created the first version of the US Air Force in 1907?
When did the US Air Force separate from the War Department? 
How many causalities did the US Air Force suffer during WWII? 
What does the USAAF stand for? 
Who signed the National Security Act of 1947? 
What was the National Military Establishment renamed in 1949?
How many subordinate divisions did the National Military Establishment contain?
What does the US Navy's responsibilities include?
Who is in charge of closed air support of infantry operations? 
What American broke the sound barrier in 1947?
When did the USAF have several missteps of aircraft procurement projects? 
Who wrote that these aircraft procurement projects were a failure of intellect and ethics?
When were the military leaders replaced after a scandal over failure to maintain its nuclear arsenal? 
What did the USAF strive to improve since 2005?
What is the deployment phase of BMT called? 
What other training do the US Air force Personnel get during BMT? 
Who acts as a mentor during this deployment phase of the BMT?
What year did the USAF take a Reduction-in-force?
Why did the USAF plan to take a reduction-in-force?
How many USAF personnel did the reduction end in during 2008?
What has there been a sharp reduction in during the years following 2005 in the USAF?
Who was Robert Gates? 
What Secretary of the Air Force resigned in 2008?
Where did the US Air Force accidentally ship a component of Nuclear Weapons? 
What US Chief of Staff of the US Air Force also resigned in June of 2008?
When was the Air Force Global Strike Command formed?
Why was the USAF forced to ground some of its squadrons in 2013?
Who was the Commander of Air Combat Command in 2013?
Why have many US Air Force pilots opted to resign from active service? 
Where have many of these US Air Force pilots chosen to find employment instead? 
What is one of the concerns of the Air Force? 
How did the USAF try to make these adjustments to help with strength and readiness of its fleet? 
How much money did Congress give to the USAF to enable them to replace some of the grounded fleet? 
Who is the Department of the Air Force managed by?
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force report to?
Who appoints the top positions in the USAF, including the Assistant Secretaries and General Council?
Upon whom does the President call on for support in his appointments to the USAF?
Who does the senior leadership roles in the USAF include? 
Who directs the Secretary of the Air Force during operational missions? 
What does the abbreviation CHOP stand for? 
Who does the AMC forces usually retain their componency to?
Who is in charge of these Change in Operational Control missions? 
What are "Chopped" units called in the USAF?
What is the top level structure of these Chopped forces in the USAF? 
What does the C-NAF provide support to?
Who does the C-NAFF coordinate with on ACEE missions?
What kind of AFSC is a JAG?
What is one of the many types of AFSC employed by the USAF? 
What is an example of an occupational field position in the USAF?
What does the abbreviation EOD stand for in the USAF?
What is one of the most dangerous jobs for USAF personnel?
What do some of these special missions in the USAF who deploy with the infantry do?
What are these enlisted positions in the USAF complimented by?
What other career fields have seen an increase in active combat missions? 
How long is the training for Explosive Ordnance Disposal in the USAF?
What USAF tech school has 31 days of training?
Who conducts the training for Technical Officers in the USAF?
How long does the flight training for the AETC's Nineteenth Air Force last? 
What groups is the USAF rank divided amoung? 
How are Enlisted promotions in the USAF decided? 
How are Officer promotions within the USAF decided?
How is a Commissioned Officer's rank shown?
Was does ROPMA stand for in the USAF? 
What are Air Force Officer promotions overseen by?
How long does it usually take to be promoted from second to first lieutenant in the USAF? 
Who establishes limits on the amount of Air Force officers? 
What promotion in the USAF is governed by a formal selection process?
Where is an officer's record in the USAF reviewed for a promotion?
What state is the Randolph Air Force Base located in? 
When does promotion from major to lieutenant colonel in the USAF typically occur?
The promotion process repeats when for officers promoted early in the USAF?
What section in the US Code for the Secretary of the Air Force allows for the appointment of warrant officers?
When did the USAF inherit warrant officer ranks from the Army?
When did Congress authorize the creation of two new senior officer grades?
When did the USAF stop appointing warrant officers?
What is the newest top enlisted grade in the USAF?
What is the lowest pay grade in the USAF?
What is the highest pay grade in the USAF?
What pay grades are included in the USAF for Senior NCOs?
What does junior NCO refer to in the USAF pay grade system?
When does NCO status happen in all other branches of the US Military?
When does NCO status occur in the USAF?
What must a Senior Airman do to become a supervisor in the USAF?
What rank is NCO status achieved in the US Army?
Where was the Uxbridge Blue dress uniform developed?
When was the first USAF dress uniform introduced?
When was the current USAF dress uniform standardized? 
Where does an officer in the USAF wear their rank insignia? 
What is worn by USAF members to indicate a billet assignment? 
What else can Badges be used to designate in the USAF? 
What is one of the types of Authorized Badges in the USAF? 
When is the special "pocket rocket" badge given to USAF personnel working in a missile system operation? 
USAF Officers can be commissioned after graduation from what school? 
What is another program that allows officers to become commissioned in the USAF?
Where is the OTS in the US currently located?
What is a line officer in the USAF? 
How many commissioning programs does the OTS offer the USAF?
What does the Air Force provide for officers of direct to non-line positions?
What fields of study in the COT are included in this area of the USAF? 
What is an example of the coursework now offered in the COT in the USAF? 
What is the more strict program that the USAF adopted in 2010 called?
What test is designed to test the fitness of airmen in the USAF? 
How long is the run that the USAF airmen are tested on for the fitness program? 
What is a passing score on the US Air Force Fitness Test? 
What score must an airman get on the US Air Force Fitness test to be able to opt out of one of the mandatory twice a year retests? 
What are the ground-attack aircraft in the USAF usually deployed in support for? 
What does the closeness to friendly troops require of these US Air Force aircraft?
What part of a battle line are the precision strike aircraft of the USAF deployed?
What type of aircraft is not appropriate to be used in close proximity of US ground troops? 
What are most attack aircraft in the US Air Force designed to do? 
What type of USAF aircraft is designed for long range airstrike attacks? 
What types of aircraft are typically limited to close proximity of battlefield conflict by the USAF? 
What increases the radius of combat missions by the US Air Force?
What countries utilize strategic bomber aircraft in their missions? 
When did the B-2A aircraft enter into service of the US Air Force? 
When did the USAF introduce the B-1B aircraft? 
What aircraft in the USAF was introduced in the 1960s?
How long is the B-52H scheduled to remain in service of the USAF? 
What aircraft is scheduled to replace the B-52 in the USAF?
What type of aircraft is used to deliver troops and weapons to military operations? 
What aircraft are considered the workhorses of the US Air Force?
The CV-22 aircraft is used by what section of the USAF?
What aircraft offers Antarctic Support to the US Air Force?
What did the USAF use the WC-130H aircraft for before they converted them for transport missions? 
What is the purpose of electronic warfare?
What nickname is given to Electronic warfare aircraft?
What does the USAF use Electronic warfare aircraft for?
What is the EC-130H used for by the US Air Force? 
What does the USAF use the E-4B aircraft for?
What is the primary function of the USAF fighter aircraft?
What is the name of a type of dual purpose fighter-bomber aircraft used by the US Air Force?
What aircraft is used by the US Air Demonstration group The Thunderbirds?
What kind of aircraft is utilized by the USAF in Full Scale Aerial Targets?
What are the QF-4 aircraft being replaced by the US Air Force? 
What kind of aircraft is the USAF's KC-135?
How does the aerial refueling aircraft supply fuel during flight?
When is air-to-air refueling primarily used by the US Air Force?
What aircraft will be available for use by the US Air Force in 2017?
What US Secretary of Defense accepted resignations of top US Air Force officials in June of 2009?
What US Secretary of the Air Force resigned following a nuclear weapons problem ?
Who was appointed to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force following Mosley's resignation?
What newspaper reported on Schwartz's dismantlement of the US Air Force's class system?
What author wrote about the US Air Force egalitarian culture?
How does the US Air Force differ from other branches of the military?
How have the enlisted forces of the US Air Force been seen?
What is the reason for the shortage of UAV operators in the US Air Force?
During what war the the USAF establish a new career field for piloting UAVs and drones?
Why did the USAF change its training methods on UAVs in 2014?
What branch of the US Military does a cultural divide prevent the US Air Force from adopting their drone protocols?
Where did some of the US Air Force traditions come from? 
What traditions does the US Air Force have? 
What organization did the US Air Force adopt "Challenge Coins" from?
What does the roof stomp tradition signify in the US Air Force?
What was a recent US Air Force recruiting slogan? 
What does the USAF slogan Uno Ab Alto mean? 
What is the most recent US Air Force recruitment slogan in October 2010?
Where can individual each USAF wing, group or squadrons individual motto be found?
What type of atmosphere can LED lighting be used?
What is an advantage to using LED lighting over the normal light sources?
What does LED stand for?
Why are some people hesitant to use LED lighting?
What is a popular use for LED lighting?
What was the nationality of the man who discovered Electroluminescence?
LED lighting is the end result of what phenomenon?
When was Electroluminescence discovered?
Who is the Soviet man that created the first LED?
What type of detector did H.J. Round use to help him in his discovery?
What year was it discovered that early LED instruments could be used for non-radio communication?
Who discovered non-radio uses for early LED devices?
The current in non-radio communication had to go through what type of component?
What other component was needed to detect the first current of a non-radio signal?
What final device was needed to hear the signal from the initial GaAs diode?
In what state what near-infrared light emission discovered? 
What type of diode was used to help discover near-infrared light emission?
In what year was the patent filed for the Semiconductor Radiant Diode?
What was the first practical LED?
The two inventors of the first practical diode were employed by what famous company?
At what global company was the first visible-spectrum LED developed?
What GE employee developed the visible-spectrum LED?
What color is associated with the visible-spectrum LED?
What color LED was later created in 1972?
What graduate student of Holonyak created the yellow LED?
What was the first commercial uses of LEDs?
How much did the early LEDs cost?
What was one use of early LED light in products?
What modern company introduced LEDs in 1968?
In what decade were production costs greatly reduced for LEDs to enable successful commercial uses?
What color LED was demonstrated in 1994?
Who demonstrated the first blue LED?
What did Nakamura, Akasaki, and Amano receive for their work?
Who investigated the efficiency of high-brightness LED at Cardiff University in 1995?
What substance did Barbieri use in his work with high-brightness LED?
What LED quickly followed the blue LEDs?
What does the YAG phosphor coating produce?
What converts absorbed light energy into an electric current?
What is the phenomenon where a P-N junction emits light when an electrical current is applied to it?
Where are the free electrons located in the production of electroluminescence?
Whose energy levels are lower than the electrons in the electroluminescence process?
Why is some energy in the electroluminescence process emitted as heat and light?
In what year was a new type of blue LED produced?
Who demonstrated in 2003 the new type of blue LED?
How much more efficient as standard incandescents was the white LED commercially available in 2003?
What is the typical operating current for high-power LEDs?
What is a symptom of LED failure?
What is rare in LED lighting?
What was notable in early red LEDs?
What could cause early light-output degradation in LEDs?
What is a classification used in LED lighting to describe how much usefulness it will receive?
LED efficacy is inversely proportional to what?
Where is LED lighting very well suited?
LEDs produce less waste heat than what other device?
What is LED lighting more susceptible to than incandescent light?
What students developed the first blue-violet LED?
The first blue-violet LED was developed at what University?
When was the first blue-violet LED developed?
What substance helped demonstrate the first blue electroluminescence?
In what decade were breakthroughs made that brought in the modern era of GaN-based optoelectronic devices?
Who first patented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?
Who first invented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?
What technology was made possible by high-power blue light sources?
What is one modern gadget that benefits from high-power blue LED lighting?
What Nobel Prize did Nakamura, Amano, and Akasaki receive in 2014?
What award did Nakamura receive in 2006 for his invention?
How many companies did a judge say infringed on Dr. Moustakas's prior blue light patent in 2015?
What was the fine given to the three companies?
What are cladding layers?
How can light emission be varied from violet to amber?
What does AlGaN stand for?
What LEDs are more efficient when produced from the InGaN/GaN systems than without?
What substance does nitrides contain?
What sort of LEDs are becoming more available on the market?
What is the range of wavelengths for cheap UV LEDs?
Shorter wavelength diodes provide wavelengths as low as what?
What UV wavelengths are found in sterilization devices?
What colors are used to form white light?
What is the method called that mixes red, green, and blue colors to form white light?
What does the multi-color white LED method need to produce the end result?
What is another name to reference the multi-color white LED method?
What is a factor that may be different in the various types of multi-color white LEDs?
Higher efficiency in multi-color white LEDs may mean what?
What is one type of multi-color white LED?
What type has the best luminous efficacy?
What luminous efficacy does trichromatic white LEDs have?
Multi-color LEDs offer what else besides the formation of white light?
What problem must be solved before multi-color LEDs can play a role in the market?
What problem results when rising temperatures decays power?
What method involves coating LEDs of one color with phosphors of different colors?
In pcLEDs method, a fraction of what light is used?
What shift does blue light undergo in the pcLEDs method?
The different colors of phosphors that can be used is based on what?
What broadens the emitted spectrum in a pcLEDs method?
What do phosphor-based LEDs luminous efficacies depend on?
What is the most popular method for making high-intensity white LEDs?
Why is efficiency sometimes lost in phosphor-based LEDs?
What are some of the luminous efficacies of yellow phosphor based white LED compared to blue?
What type of emitter is used in phosphor-based white LED methods?
What can improve the efficiency of LED-based white light?
What is the most efficient yellow phosphor?
What is the percentage of stoke shift loss in YAG phosphor?
What area are scientists looking into regarding phosphor LED development?
What is one method that can raise the efficiency of phosphor-based LEDs?
White LEDs can be made by coating what?
What are near-ultraviolet LEDs coated with to create white LED?
What device also works in a similar way as NUV LEDs?
The method of coating NUVs less efficient than what other LEDs?
What light can harm human eyes or skin?
What is being used to produce white LEDs?
What size are the wafers used to create white LEDs?
By using silicon wafers, what is being avoided?
What needs to be used to reflect light that would otherwise be wasted?
By what year will% of all GaN LEDs be made with gallium-nitride-on-silicon wafers?
What nanocrystals possess unique optical properties?
Quantum Dot LEDs can do what special skill?
The narrowing of the emission spectrum in Quantum Dot LEDs allows them to do what?
How many types of schemes are there in Quantum Dot LED excitation?
What is one scheme of Quantum Dot excitation?
What is one material used in electrical-excitation?
During the electrical-excitation scheme, what moves into the quantum dot layer?
A Quantum Dot LED has been used in what?
How many lumens can some high-power LEDs emit?
Up to how many densities have been achieved with LED power?
Why must High-power LEDs be mounted on a heat sink?
What will happen if the heat from a high-power LED is not removed?
What can one high-power LED replace?
What company has developed LEDs that can operate on AC power?
What is the efficacy of an AC powered HP-LED?
When did Seoul Semiconductor release the first high DC voltage LED?
What is so good about ac powered HP-LEDs?
What did Seoul Semiconductor name their ac powered HP-LED?
What type of LEDs are available in seven-segment format?
What is another format that Alphanumeric LEDs are available in?
Which alphanumeric LED display can display all letters?
What type of pixels does a dot matrix display use?
What has reduced the popularity of numeric LED displays?
What makes RGB LEDs different?
How are Digital-RGB LED strobe signals connected?
What object sources the data in of the first LED of a digital rgb LED?
The microprocessor does what in a digital RGB LED?
What is one example of where Digital RGB LED lights are used?
What does an LED filament consist of?
How are LED filaments used?
What type of voltage is needed for LED filaments?
What helps LED filaments remain low cost?
Single die LEDs require what?
How are LEDs similar to other diodes?
What is a solution to preventing an LED failure?
What can cause a large change in current in LEDs?
What is a constant-voltage source?
What feature do most LED fixtures need to have?
How are most LEDs classified?
What does being a Class 1 LED product mean?
What type of LED can possibly cause blindness?
Which government advocated the banning of Class 2 LEDs?
What class are extremely bright LEDs listed as?
What dangerous metal can LEDs contain?
What substance does fluorescent lamps contain?
Which LEDs are considered dangerous by a 2011 study?
According to a California study, what harmful metal is in most LEDs?
What LEDs are considered safer than any other?
What type of light is ideal for traffic signals?
In what year were luminescence standards set?
What color LEDs are used when night vision is important?
What is an example of a night vision needed area?
What is another use for one-color light?
Because of their high output, LED lights are very useful where?
Why are LED lights sought after for various applications?
LED brake lights are how many times faster than incandescent ones?
What color LEDs are now starting to be used more?
What types of light can LEDs form better than incandescent?
Where are infrared LEDs used in everday life?
How are LEDs used in theaters?
LEDs can send data over what type of cable?
What type of fiber forms the backbone of the internet?
In what country does one kilowatt-hour of electricity causes 1.34 pounds of CO 2 emission?
How much CO2 emission would a 40-watt light bulb produce after 10 hours?
A 6-watt LED left on for 10 hours a day will emit how much CO 2?
How much can a building's carbon footprint be reduced by switching to LEDs?
LEDs are often used for what type of systems?
Why are LEDs preferred for machine vision systems?
What can help make LEDs more widely used?
What is the most common example of a machine vision system?
Where are some LEDs in machine vision systems found?
Where are LEDs often used?
Where are opto-isolators found?
What is an example of a device that uses free space optic communications?
What does an optoisolator do?
In what common household item can you find infrared LEDs?
What video game console uses infrared LEDs?
What device uses infrared LEDs to measure oxygen saturation?
Some flatbed scanners use what type of LED?
By using LEDs, scanners do not have to what?
Grow lights use LEDs for what process?
What quality has LEDs been used as?
What LED has the flattest I/V curve above the knee?
What LEDs have a very steep I/V curve?
LED forward voltage is more current-dependent than what diode?
Zener diodes below what voltage are not widely available?
What does the state want a police force to do?
What are gendarmerie?
What are police usually separate from?
How are police usually paid?
When were police used to protect the class system?
What kind of service are police?
What problem do many police forces have?
How are police usually paid?
What kind of service are police?
When were police used to protect the class system?
What problem do many police forces have?
Which Chinese kingdoms developed law enforcement?
What period was the Chu kingdom in?
What period was the Jin kingdom in?
Which countries adopted the 'prefecture system' from China?
What did ancient China call its police?
What war ended in 1479?
Who formed Spain's first national police force?
What was Spain's first national police force called, in Spanish?
What does Santa Hermandad mean?
When did Spain suppress local police units?
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?
What was the Marshal's force called?
What was the Constable's force called, in English?
What was the Constable's force called, in French?
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?
What was the Marshal's force called?
What was the Constable's force called, in English?
What was the Constable's force called, in French?
In what year did Paris get a police force?
Who created Paris's police force?
What was the largest European city in 1667?
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in English?
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in French?
Who was Paris's first head of police?
How many commissioners worked under Reynie?
How many policing districts was Paris divided into?
When was Paris's police system expanded to the rest of France?
When were police inspectors added to Paris's police?
When did the French language adopt the word 'police'?
Which dictionary said police were 'a symbol of foreign oppression'?
What language did French borrow the word 'police' from?
When were the Marine Police created in the UK?
What was the first use of 'police' in the UK?
Who convinced the West Indies merchants in London to establish police?
Where did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?
When did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?
How much cargo had been being stolen from West Indies merchants in London each year?
How did Colquhoun praise the French police?
What was the initial size of the Thames River Police force?
How many dock workers were the Thames River Police policing?
How many dock workers did Colquhoun say were criminals?
When was the Thames River Police made a public service?
How much cargo theft did the Thames River Police prevent in its first year?
How did the Bow Street group pay their employees?
Who started the Bow Street detectives?
Who came up with the concept of the 'new' police?
How did the Thames River Police pay their employees?
What schedule did the Thames River Police employees work?
Which law established Glasgow's police?
When was Glasgow's police force established?
Which law established Ireland's police?
When was Ireland's police force established?
What was Ireland's police force called?
Who was the 'father of modern policing'?
Whose philosophy influenced Peel?
What political position did Bentham think police should have?
How did Peel standardize police?
How did Peel organize police?
When was the Metropolitan Police Act passed?
What did the Metropolitan Police Act say police were a subset of?
Where was the 'Continental model' of police from?
What part of the government did French police work under?
When did Rio get its first police investigator?
How had the Rio police grown by the 17th century?
When did Minas Gerais get a cavalry regiment?
Where did the Portuguese royal family move in 1808?
Who invaded Portugal in 1808?
When did Canada get its first police?
What was Canada's first police force?
When was the Toronto police created?
When was the Montreal police created?
When were the first Mounties created?
What were the Old West's local police options?
Which military branch helped the Old West's inadequate local police?
Which military branch did the Pinkertons exceed at their height?
Which private contractor acted as police for businesses?
Which countries' scholars developed the contemporary police concept?
When was the 'Treatise on the Police' published?
What was the 'Treatise on the Police' called in French?
Who wrote the 'Treatise on the Police'?
What was von Hornigk's career?
Which economic theory did Foucault say supported the police?
How did Foucault describe the social duty of police?
Who wrote about Polizeiwissenschaft?
Why did the functions of police grow beyond law enforcement to urban planning?
Who wrote 'Preventive Police'?
When was 'Preventive Police' published?
Where was 'Preventive Police' published?
What did Chadwick say police should be focused on?
What was the alternative to prevention?
What do some police departments make detectives go back to periodically?
Where do some think the most important police work happens?
How do patrol officers affect crime?
When did Nadelmann write about global policing?
When did Sheptycki write about global policing?
What terms have been used to describe policing beyond one country?
When did Deflem write about cross-border policing?
What groups did European police work against across borders in the 19th century?
Which police force monitored Karl Marx?
What international police agency was created before WW2?
In what era did cross-border policing increase?
Where did Sheptycki study police cooperation?
When did Sheptycki write about police cooperation?
When did the Channel region establish routine cross-border policing?
When was the Schengen Treaty signed?
What did the Schengen Treaty do for policing?
Where has cross-border policing been most under-studied?
Who compared transnational police information and intelligence sharing practices?
What kind of policing has become common practice?
What problems did Sheptycki say 'organizational pathologies' have caused for police?
What paradox did Sheptycki point out?
Where has transnational policing become more important?
Who wrote about police development-aid in 2007?
What kind of countries get assistance with policing?
What concern did Hills raise about power imbalances?
What concern did Hills raise about police models?
Who wrote the Global Accountability Report for 2007?
Why is transnational policing so unaccountable?
How accountable is Interpol?
What is the least-accountable IGO?
What should non-lethal weapons properly be called?
What are common less-lethal weapons?
What is supposed to be the last resort for police?
What is South Africa's "shoot-to-kill" policy?
Where can police shoot fleeing convicts?
How do modern police often communicate?
Where do police have radios?
Why do police use radios?
What have computers in police cars enabled for investigation?
What have computers in police cars enabled for reporting?
When do police often use unmarked cars?
What use of unmarked cars is controversial?
Why did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?
When did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?
Why do some cops use bicycles to patrol?
How do bicycles help catch some suspects?
What do police use to control motorcyclist events?
Who was O.W. Wilson a student of?
Who introduced education requirements for US police?
Why did Wilson rotate officers between communities?
Where did Wilson reduce police corruption?
How did Wilson recruit more qualified police?
What does Miranda provide?
What does the 5th Amendment protect against?
Which amendment prevents self-incrimination?
When was the Terry v. Ohio case?
Which two parts did Terry v. Ohio divide seizure into?
What is an investigatory stop's search limited to?
What is the legal status of UK police officers?
What can only Inspector-ranked UK officers do?
What can only Superintendent-ranked UK officers do?
What powers of a new UK police officer are the same as a Commissioner's?
Why do some police acts limit when police can interfere without court orders?
What could be impeded without police interference?
How could police help the owner when a restaurant guest doesn't pay because their wallet got stolen?
