Which company produces the iPod?
When was the original iPod released?
How many different types of iPod are currently available?
What kind of device is the iPod?
The iPod Touch uses what kind of interface?
In what year was the first iPod released?
What company manufactures the iPod?
How many versions of the iPod currently exist?
Which is the smallest version of the iPod?
In what year was the iPod most recently redesigned?
In addition to playing music, what other function can the iPod perform?
What is the smallest data capacity for an iPod product?
What is the largest data capacity for an iPod product?
Which iPod product features the smallest data storage capacity?
Which current iPod product features the largest data storage capacity?
What's the storage capacity of the iPod Shuffle?
What's the storage capacity for the iPod Touch?
What Apple program is used to communicate between computers and portable devices?
Which operating systems are compatible with iTunes?
What's the name of the software used to manage music and other media on Apple devices?
Prior to iOS 5, how many apps were required to play music and videos on iPhone and iPad?
In mid-2010, which Apple device had higher sales than iPod?
With what iOS release did Apple standardize media apps on all their products?
In what year did iPhone sales surpass those of iPods?
What are the titles of the standard media apps on current Apple devices?
What processor model is used in the iPod Touch?
Which generation of iPod Touch was made availalbe in July of 2015?
What's the most recent generation of iPod Touch?
In what year was the most recent iPod Touch released?
What type of processor does the current iPod Touch use?
In how many colors is the current iPod Touch available?
In what year was the iPod first introduced?
In what year did iPod sales show improvement?
Which Apple engineer led original iPod design group?
What radio was the primary inspiration for the look of the iPod?
What was the storage capacity of the first iPod?
in what year was the original iPod released?
How large was the hard drive on the original iPod?
What other popular music player did Apple compare their new product to?
What is the name of Apple's hardware engineering chief who helped design the iPod?
Who manufactured the hard drives for the first iPods?
Which company worked with Apple in creating the user interface for the iPod?
What was the name of the font used prior to the release of the iPod Mini?
In what year was the 6th gen iPod Classic released?
The 6th gen iPod Classic and 3rd gen iPod nano featured which font?
Who supervised the design and implementation of the iPod user interface?
What software did Apple use as the basis for their iPod software?
What typeface does the current iPod use?
In what year was a special edition of the iPod produced?
For what musical group was a special edition of the iPod first made?
What color was the metal on the U2 version of the iPod?
What type of media was included with purchase of the U2 version of the iPod?
Of what band did Apple present a special edition iPod 5G?
What color was the special U2 iPod model?
In what year did apple release the special U2 model of the iPod?
Apple was involved in a lawsuit with which company in 2007?
Who previously applied for a patent for an iPod-like device?
In what country did Kane Kramer apply for his patent?
In what year did Kane Kramer apply for his patent?
What did Kane Kramer call the device for which he wanted a patent?
What patent holding company sued Apple in 2007?
What was the name of the previously-patented music player from 1981?
Who was the holder of the previous patent for the "plastic music box"?
Who came up with the name for Apple's portable mp3 player?
What was Vinnie Chieco's profession?
What film inspired the name of the iPod?
Who first trademarked the iPod name?
In what year was Apple given rights to the iPod name?
What movie inspired the iPod name?
What was the name of the copywriter that proposed the name "iPod"?
Who held the original trademark for the iPod name?
When were images of new iPod colors leaked?
Who leaked the photos of new iPod colors?
What version of iTunes contained the leaked photos of new iPod colors?
What was the latest version of iTunes as of mid-2015?
Who first leaked the photos of the new iPod color scheme?
What audio deficiency was found in the 3rd gen iPods?
What kind of headphones could partially mitigate the bass response issues of the 3rd gen iPods?
What is an example of a device that could entirely mitigate the bass response issues of the 3rd gen iPods?
What part of audio output was substandard on 3rd generation iPods?
What component was to blame for the weak bass of the 3rd generation iPod?
What acoustic element could be distorted by different audio settings in iPods prior to 2007?
Name four sound profiles that would result in bass distortion on pre-2007 iPods.
What specific problem caused the issue with bass distortion?
iPods released before what year had issues with distorted bass?
What EQ settings were known to have issues with bass distortion?
What type of sensory issue was a concern prior to the release of 5th gen iPods?
In what markets did 6th gen iPods limit the highest volume of the player?
What was the limit imposed on how loud the iPod could play sounds in the EU?
In what country did Apple have to recall iPods?
What is the highest volume output level of European 6th-generation iPods?
What country originally pulled iPods due to higher-than-allowed volume levels?
What was the first type of connection used by the iPod to charge and transfer files?
What was an alternate method of charging the iPod?
What type of connector was originally required to upload songs or recharge the iPod?
In which generation did iPod start providing compatibility with USB?
What iPod feature allowed for USB connections with the device?
Which generation of iPod Classic was the first to abandon use of FireWire in transferring files?
Starting with which generation of iPod Nano was FireWire charging functionality no longer available?
What kind of connection is provided on the iPod Shuffle for both audio output and file transfer?
Which generation iPod was the first to include the 30-pin dock connector?
Which model of iPod combined the headphone jack and data port?
What interface was gradually phased out for both charging and data transfer?
What interface replaced FireWire in later iterations of the iPod?
Which iPod accessory was made by Apple but is no longer produced?
What are two companies that make iPod accessories?
What part of the iPod is needed to communicate with peripherals?
What is the condition for third parties using the dock connector?
The majority of peripherals for iPod are produced by what kinds of companies?
What's the name of the now-discontinued accessory manufactured by Apple, that connected via the iPod's dock connector?
What new connector did Apple unveil on September 12, 2012?
What other Apple product was unveiled on September 12, 2012?
How man pins did the pre-Lightning dock connecter use?
How many pins did the Lightning connector have?
On how many sides of the Lightning connector are the pins located?
What's Apple's code name for the newer 8-pin dock connector?
What was the first iPod Touch generation to feature the Lightning connector?
What is the name of an Apple-produced iPod accessory?
What is an example of an iPod accessory made work exercise?
What are six companies that made some of the first peripherals for the iPod?
What can A/V cables be used to connect the iPod to?
Who manufactures a pedometer accessory for the iPod?
Which company manufactures the iPod Hi-Fi accessory?
What company was first to create a means of connecting the iPod to an automobile?
In what year did Apple reveal that it would provide compatibility with a wide range of auto manufacturers?
Which company provides the ability to connect to iPods as a standard feature in their automobiles?
Which car company released the first automobile interface for the iPod?
Which car company first offered iPod connectivity as a standard feature on their whole product line?
What companies have developed iPod interfacing for their stereo systems?
What type of transmitter is used in the iTrip?
What has become a standard inclusion in cars for several different auto companies?
Which type of iPod car integration product is illegal in certain countries?
What audio integration feature has become standard on many car models?
In 2007, which airlines made deals to include iPod connections on their planes?
Where can people using iPods on planes view the device's interface?
What are two airlines that considered implementing iPod connections but did not join the 2007 agreement?
Which airlines first agreed to install seat connections for iPods?
In what year did airlines first start to accommodate the iPod?
What is the name of an audio format developed by Apple?
Which product enabled users to view images on the device?
What Microsoft media format is not natively supported by Apple devices?
What does DRM stand for?
What computer OS did iPod software exclusively work with at launch?
What are some examples of audio formats supported by the iPod?
What was the first model to support JPEG and other still image formats?
How many hosts are recognized by an iPod the first time they're used?
What will be erased if an iPod is set to sync with a different computer?
What must an iPod be connected to before iTunes can synchronize?
How many buttons do most iPods use?
On what part of newer iPods can you find the buttons?
Where are the controls located on the 3rd gen iPod Shuffle?
What kind of interface does the iPod touch use instead of the click wheel?
What other device shares the interface used by the iPod Touch?
Most iPods feature how many buttons?
The 3rd generation of which iPod model had its controls only on the earphone cable?
Which other Apple product does the iPod Touch share an interface and OS with?
When was the Apple iTunes Store launched?
What program is required to access the iTunes Store?
When were videos made available through the iTunes store?
When did Apple begin selling entire films through the iTunes store?
In what year was the iTunes store established?
In what year did videos first become available on iTunes?
When were full-length moved added to the iTunes store?
When the iTunes store was launched, what type of file format was used?
How many computers were allowed to play files that used the FairPlay DRM system?
In what category could files without digital rights management be found on the iTunes store?
When did Apple reveal that most of the iTunes selection was free from DRM?
By what time did Apple project its entire catalog would be free of DRM?
What was the original format for purchased audio files on iTunes?
What was the name of the DRM system originally used by Apple and iTunes?
What was the name of the premium service that offered higher quality and DRM-free songs?
In what year was DRM completely eliminated from the iTunes offerings?
What are two stores which sell files with DRM not compatible with iPods?
For what device's sales does Apple leverage the iTunes store?
The iPod can play music from other online stores as long as they don't contain what feature?
What company ended its deal with Apple's music store in July of 2007?
What entity did Universal have a contract with prior to July of 2007?
In what year did Universal Music Group let their contract with iTunes lapse?
What was the name of the event at which the iTunes Wi-Fi store was launched?
On what date was the iTunes Wi-Fi Music Store launched?
In what year was the iTunes Wi-Fi Music Store introduced?
Which Apple device has the ability to sync with iTunes via the phone network?
On what devices can video games be used?
What was included on the first iPod?
Who created Brick?
What are three games, in addition to Brick, which have been included with the iPod?
What is another phrase meaning hidden feature?
What was the first, hidden game included with the original iPod?
What other games were later added to the original iPod?
In what year did the iTunes store begin allowing users to buy video games?
Which version of iTunes was introduced with the ability to purchase games?
What was the first generation of iPod Classic on which games like Mahjong and Tetris could be played?
On which generation of iPod Nano can games be played?
In what year did iTunes 7 launch, along with a plethora of additional games?
Which generation iPod was required to enjoy the new games available on iTunes 7?
What are the names of companies producing video games for Apple's MP3 player?
What market can Apple participate in now that it has a variety of games available for iPod?
What two publications have covered iPod games?
What format is used for iPod game files?
What file format is being covered up by the use of ipg files?
What does SDK stand for?
What is the only operating system on which iPhone SDK-made games can be played?
What file format are iPod games distributed in?
An app produced with the iPhone SDK can only run on what devices?
Is the Apple SDK available to third-party game publishers?
What kind program is commonly used to move files between iTunes and an iPod?
What kind of other applications enable communication between iTunes and an iPod?
Rather than copying media files directly to it, what software must be used for this purpose so that they are accessible?
What kind of security determines if files moved to a computer can be played?
What minimum version of iTunes is required to transfer purchased media from an iPod to an authorized computer?
In what kind of folder are files located in the iPod?
On what kind of operating system can hidden iPod files be accessed?
What method of file recovery is used to retrieve data from the iPod?
In what year did Apple face multiple intellectual property lawsuits?
What did the 2005 lawsuits accuse Apple of doing?
What other companies were named in the suit filed by Pat-rights?
On whose behalf did Pat-rights take Apple to court?
Which company sued Apple for breach of a "music jukebox" patent in 2005?
Which Apple technology did Pat-rights complain breached their patent in a lawsuit?
What interface component did Apple attempt to patent in 2005?
When did Apple receive a decision on its attempt to patent rotational user inputs?
Which competitor sued Apple over rights to part of the software user interface?
What was the name of the patent over which Creative asserted its ownership?
From which entity did Creative request an investigation into Apple importing their devices to the US?
What interface feature did Apple unsuccessfully try to patent?
Which rival company sued Apple in 2005 and 2006?
When did Creative and Apple come to an agreement over their intellectual property issues?
How much money did Apple have to pay to Creative as a result of their agreement?
What program did Creative join in order to make iPod peripherals?
How much did Apple pay to Creative Technologies to settle their 2006 suit?
What's the name of the program by which 3rd parties sell iPod accessories?
What share of the US digital music player market does iPod hold?
When did iPod become the leader in digital music device sales?
How much of the market did iPod claim as of January 2007?
Who reported Apple's market share in 2007?
Approximately what percentage of the hard drive-based music player sales does iPod have since 2004?
Approximately what percentage of the overall music player market does the iPod line have?
What did the iPod's US market share peak at in 2005?
When did HP unveil their own edition of the iPod?
What does HP stand for?
What major retailer sold HP-branded iPod devices?
HP-branded iPods accounted for what share of iPod purchases?
What kind of terms and conditions led HP to leave the iPod market?
Which computer company sold iPods from 2004-05 as part of a license agreement with Apple?
How many iPods did Apple reveal it sold in April of 2007?
How much of Apple's revenue was generated by iPod purchases in Q2 of 2007?
What is an item that owners of iPods may also purchase?
How much revenue did Apple announce for Q2 2007?
In which year did Apple top sales of 100,000,000 iPods?
As of 2007, what percentage of Apple's revenue came from iPod sales?
What was Apple's revenue for Q3 2007?
Desktop computers made up how much of Apple's revenue in the third quarter of 2007?
How much money did Apple make in 2007?
What was the value of Apple's cash assets at the end of 2007?
With the help of strong iPod sales, how much profit did they turn in 2007?
When did Apple reveal it had achieved its highest quarterly earnings to date?
What was Apple's highest quarterly profit as of Q1 2008?
How much of Apple's revenue resulted from purchases of laptop computers in Q1 2008?
What percentage of Apples revenue in 1Q08 came from iPods, more than doubling the percentage of notebook sales?
Who was Chief Financial Officer of Apple in July of 2009?
From what year did iPod purchases begin to continuously decline?
How much revenue did iPod sales account for in Q4 2008?
Approximately how many total iPods had been sold by late 2009?
Which was the first year since iPod's introduction that no new model was released?
What rank did iPod achieve among various computer products in 2006?
What kind of reviews do iPods tend to get?
What two companies use the AAC format for music files?
What file format is not supported by Sony Ericsson and Nokia?
Which publication praised iPods for revolutionizing the industry?
Which phone manufacturers adopted the AAC file format to become better iPod-compatible?
Which PC magazine praised the iPod for having "altered the landscape for portable audio players"?
Aside from recreational use, in what other arena have iPods found use?
What are two purposes for which iPods are used in business?
What is the name of a company that uses iPods as part of its training?
Where is Royal and Western Infirmaries located?
What University gave an iPod to first year students in 2004?
What publication lauded the iPod for enabling people to listen to thousands of songs on a portable player?
Which major university began issuing iPods to all incoming freshmen starting in 2004?
Which magazine placed the iPod on its Best of the Decade list for the 00's?
What period of music did the iPod help bring to a close?
In which industry did the iPod have a major impact?
What did the iPod promote that prompted a big change in the music industry?
The ease of collecting singles with the iPod and iTunes is credited with ending what "era" in pop music?
How long were 5th generation iPods marketed as being able to function before needing to be charged?
Which website criticized Apple's battery life claims?
In what year was Apple sued for issues relating to its battery life?
Discrepancy in what spec brought about a class action suit against Apple in 2003?
How many hours of real-time battery life did the 5th-generation iPod test at, compared to its advertised 14 hours?
Whose directions can be followed to interact with iPod batteries?
What did Apple originally tell consumers to purchase when their iPod batteries no longer worked?
What kind of battery does the iPod use?
Which iPod component did Apple somewhat inconveniently made non-replaceable?
What type of rechargeable battery does Apple use in its iPods?
What did Apple launch on November 14, 2003?
How much did iPod owners originally have to pay for replacement batteries?
What was needed to replace an iPod Nano battery?
What generation saw iPod batterys being affixed with glue?
In what year did Apple begin a formal battery replacement program?
What was the original price for a replacement battery from Apple?
Which iPod model has its battery soldered into the unit?
What part of the iPod Nano was the cause of the overheating issue?
What program allowed users to exchange iPod Nanos which suffered from overheating problems with new safe models?
What are two subjects of criticism of iPods?
What website ran a survey to learn how often iPods ceased working?
How often did MacInTouch discover iPods stopped working, according to their survey?
When did iPod owners take issue with the fragility of the iPod screen?
What did Apple include with the iPod to resolve the screen problem?
Which type of iPod storage proved more reliable than hard drive storage?
The first generation nano suffered from which component getting damaged easily?
What publication revealed information about the working conditions of iPod labor?
What governs iPod manufacturers' labor policies?
What percentage of the time did The Mail on Sunday claim workers labored for at least seven straight days?
Which British tabloid accused Apple of unfair worker conditions in 2006?
What percentage of Apple's manufacturing employees worked over 60 hour weeks?
Who did Apple partner with to monitor its labor policies?
What organization did Apple join to monitor its labor policies?
What company was found to be violating Apple's labor policies?
Where was the Foxconn plant located?
What was the name of Apple's manufacturing company that was accused of overworking its employees?
What auditor company did Apple hire to oversee worker conditions following the controversy?
In what year did Foxconn workers first unionize?
In what year did Chinese Foxconn emplyees kill themselves?
What disappeared in 2009 prior to the suicide of a Foxconn employee?
In what year did several Foxconn workers commit suicide?
What attribute of the United States could be thought to lead more international and less domestic employment opportunities?
To work as a boot disk for a Mac, what file system must an iPod be formatted with?
If connected to a Windows PC when first set up, what file system will an iPod be formatted with?
What year was Kanye born?
What kind of music does Kanye West perform?
What is Kanye West's middle name?
When is Kanye West's birthday?
What was the first label that Kanye produced for?
Who are some well known artists that Kanye produced for early in his career?
How many albums has Kanye released since starting his solo career in 2004?
With which artists that Kanye formerly produced for did he go on to collaborate with?
Where did Kanye West live as a child?
What was Kanye West's first job title after art school?
What year did Kanye West release his first rap CD?
How many total CDs has Kanye West released in his career so far?
How many albums has Kanye sold?
How many downloads do Kanye's tracks have across the globe?
Kanye is known for having the most of what type of award for his age?
How many albums does Kanye have on the "500 Greatest Albums of All Time" list?
What popular magazine placed Kanye on their annual list in 2005 and 2015?
How many CDs has Kanye West sold?
How many Grammy Awards has Kanye West won?
How many of Kanye West's albums were recognized by Rolling Stone Magazine?
Which years was Kanye West mentioned in Time Magazine?
What subject did Kanye's mother teach at her university?
What Georgia city was Kanye West born?
What was the name of the business that Kanye West helped fund in 2006?
Where did Kanye West's mother work before becoming his manager?
What was the name of Kanye West's high school?
Where did Kanye and his mother relocate when he was 10?
While staying in China, Kanye was the only what in his class?
How well did Kanye do in high school?
At what age did Kanye West relocate to China?
What University was the cause of West's mother moving the family to China?
What was Kanye creating when he was five?
What was one of the first tracks written by Kanye when he was 13?
Who did Kanye meet early in his career who later mentored him?
What activity did Kanye West start doing when he was five?
What was the name of the song he wrote at age thirteen?
What was the name of the producer that helped Kanye West?
Where did Kanye receive a scholarship to attend?
How old was Kanye when he dropped out of college?
What school did Kanye West go to in 1997?
What subject was Kanye West's focus at Chicago State University?
At what age did Kanye West leave school to follow his musical passion?
What was the name of the CD that Kanye recorded based on his failed college experience?
Who were the beats Kanye made in the 90's originally intended for?
What types of records did Kanye sample in his early career.
What music group did Kanye join when he couldn't release his solo album?
In what time period did Kanye begin producing?
When did Kanye West start his production career?
For which artist did Kanye West act as a ghost producer? 
What late 1990s Chicago rap group was Kanye West a member of?
What firm managed Kanye West's rap group? 
What year was the first Go-Getters album released? 
Kanye produced the third song from the second album of what artist?
What rappers were featured in the songs that Kanye produced for Tell 'Em Why U Madd?
Which U.S. Billboard 200 chart topper did Kanye West produce a song for?
What was the name of the CD produced by Kanye that was by a made-up character?
What label did Kanye begin to work for in 2000?
What album did Kanye receive production credits on in 2001?
In what year did Roc-A-Fella make Kanye West known?
What was the name of the CD West produced for Jay Z in 2001?
Although Kanye was achieving fame by producing, what did he actually want to be?
What label declined to work with Kanye after many meetings?
What career was Kanye's ultimate dream?
What did Kanye West not have that made record companies turn him down?
Which record company turned Kanye down after many meetings?
Who almost picked up Kanye but was ultimately swayed?
What label finally (although reluctantly) picked up Kanye?
What did Kanye's peers see him as while he tried to pursue his rap career?
What man was almost ready to give Kanye a record deal?
What record company eventually signed Kanye West?
What track did Kanye compose and perform while injured from his accident?
What was the name of Kanye's 2002 mixtape that he wrote while in the hospital?
After dropping his mixtape, Kanye revealed the name of his debut album to be what?
What was the date of Kanye's car wreck?
What song did Kanye record about his experience with what happened after the wreck?
What was the name of the mixtape Kanye released in December of 2002?
What happened to Kanye's debut album that caused him to remaster most of it?
How many times was the release date for Kanye's first album pushed back?
In what city did West finish recording his first album?
How many times was The College Dropout's release put off?
What was supposed to be the original release date for The College Dropout?
What place on the Billboard chart did Kanye's album debut at?
How many publications voted The College Dropout for album of the year?
What was the name of the single off the debut album that gave Kanye mainstream attention?
What label did Kanye create following the success of his first album's release?
When was The College Dropout finally released?
What song was the second released off of Kanye's The College Dropout album?
How many Grammy nominations did The College Dropout receive?
What was the name of the record label that West founded?
What kind of ensemble did Kanye hire to work on his second album?
What composer worked alongside Kanye on the album's production?
What was the name of Kanye's second studio album?
How many copies of Late Registration sold in its first year?
What English music group was an inspiration for Kanye West on his second album?
What was the name of West's second album?
How many copies of Late Registration were sold in the United States?
The loss of which award caused Kanye to leave the American Music Awards?
Kanye participated alongside Mike Meyers in a relief benefit show for what natural disaster?
What magazine did Kanye don a thorn crown for the cover of in 2006?
In which AMA category did Kanye lose in 2004?
Which actor was alongside Kanye West when he insulted President Bush?
What magazine did Kanye West pose for in 2006 that caused another controversy?
What broadcast for NBC was Kanye presenting for when he spoke negatively about President Bush?
What band did Kanye tour with for a year?
What setting did Kanye want his next tracks to perform well in?
Who did Kanye study in order to develop his lyrical skills?
Which band did Kanye West travel with for the Vertigo Tour?
What decade of music inspired Kanye West after his tour with U2?
Other than U2 and Led Zeppelin, what other band inspired Kanye West?
What other country singer besides Johnny Cash did Kanye listen to?
What was the name of Kanye's third album?
Kanye released Graduation at the same time of what other famous rapper, thus drawing media comparison?
How many copies did Graduation sell in its first week of release? 
What famous electronic duo did Kanye sample on his third album?
What was the name of Kanye West's third CD?
What artist was Kanye's third album release competing against?
What music group was in Kanye's first release off of Graduation?
Following the loss of his mother, who did Kanye end his long-term relationship with?
What vocal technology did Kanye pick up for his next set of artistic endeavors?
In what year did Kanye West's mother pass away?
What was the name of Kanye's ex-fiance?
What was the name of Kanye's 2008 music tour?
In what state did Kanye West record them majority of his fourth album?
What was the first song released off of Kanye's fourth album?
What label pushed out Kanye's fourth studio album?
Which album by Kanye West featured the song "Love Lockdown"?
808s & Heartbreak was released by what company? 
When was 808s & Heartbreaks released? 
What was the second song released off of 808s? 
The major usage of musical machine on 808s was described as eponymous?
What journalist gave "808s and Hearbreak" critical acclimation 4 years after its release?
What was the name of the journalist that wrote about Kanye's album in 2012?
Where did Kanye's famous mic-grab incident occur at?
From who did Kanye grab the mic from to make his statement?
Kanye's tour with what artist was cancelled following his outburst at the VMA's?
In what year did Kanye's biggest controversy so far take place?
What artist did Kanye West interrupt Taylor Swift to defend?
Which artist was Kanye supposed to tour with, but couldn't due to the Taylor Swift controversy?
What awards ceremony did Kanye not receive any nominations for after the MTV controversy?
Where did Kanye base himself to create his next album?
What industry did Kanye turn to after taking a break from recording music?
What state did Kanye West hide in while writing his next album?
What is the name of Kanye's album released in 2010?
What award was My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy omitted from?
What was the name of Kanye's fifth album?
When was Kanye West's fifth album debuted? 
What song off of Kanye's fifth album was a hit internationally?
What was the name of the free music promotion on Kanye's website in 2010?
What festival did Kanye headline in 2011?
With what other hiphop artist did Kanye collaborate with?
Where did Kanye premier a film directed by himself in 2012?
What event did Kanye headline in 2011?
What was the name of the joint album Kanye made with Jay Z?
What was the top single off the album "Watch the Throne"?
In what year was "Cruel Summer" released?
What film festival did Kanye West premier a film called "Cruel Summer"?
Where did Kanye begin production on his sixth album?
What became the name of his sixth studio album?
Who did Kanye tour alongside of in order to promote the efforts of Yeezus?
In what year did Kanye West begin working on his sixth album?
What was the inspiration behind Kanye West's decision to call Rick Rubin?
What was the name of Kanye's sixth album?
On what date was Yeezus released?
What artist did Kanye go on tour with while promoting album number six?
What was the name of Kanye's first child with Kim Kardashian?
What brand set to collaborate on an apparel line with Kanye?
What famous British artist worked with Kanye on multiple singles?
Where did Kanye perform his single "All Day" with a menagerie of other artists?
Who is the mother of Kanye's first child?
What is Kanye West's first child's name?
In what Italian city were Kim Kardashian and Kanye West wed?
What musician joined Kanye West on the song "Only One"?
What was the name of the Adidas clothing line by Kanye West that he released in 2013?
What did Kanye change the title of his next planned album from So Help Me God to?
From which institution did Kanye receive an honorary doctorate?
How many people signed a petition to keep Kanye from performing at Glastonbury Festival?
What was the original name of Kanye's album "SWISH"?
What school awarded Kanye west an honorary doctorate?
How many people petitioned his show at the Glastonbury Music Festival in the UK?
What was the tentative release date announced for Kanye's next studio album?
What was Kanye's next album renamed again to?
With what other rapper did Kanye west have a Twitter feud with in early 2016?
What became the final title of Kanye's next album?
What platform was The Life of Pablo officially released on?
What song  by West was debuted in December 2015?
On January 26, 2016, Kanye told the world he changed the name of his next album from SWISH to what?
What artist did Kanye West have a feud with over Amber Rose?
What was the name of Kanye's clothing line premiered at Madison Square Garden?
What English musician did Kanye cite as one of his biggest inspirations?
Kanye has stated that members from which rap group influenced his early style?
What name did Kanye's early production style coin.
What artist was named by Kanye West to be his "most important inspiration"?
Who was Kanye's greatest cultural figure?
What was the name of the song that first featured Kanye's "chipmunk soul" style?
What composer did Kanye collaborate with for his second record?
What classical elements did Brion bring to the production of Kanye's album?
What sort of orchestra did Kanye tour with while promoting his second album?
What composer did Kanye West work with for his second album?
What English trip-hop group helped influence Kanye on his second album?
What was the name of Kanye's third record?
What musical direction did Kanye take with his third album?
Kanye drew inspiration from The Rolling Stones, U2, and Led Zeppelin in what ways?
What year was Kanye West's third album released?
What kind of sound did Kanye abandon a rap and hiphop one for with his fourth album?
Who did Kanye become inspired by while creating 808s & Heartbreak?
What types of instruments are present on his fourth album?
What other artist besides Gary Numan and TJ Swan helped inspire Kanye's fourth album?
What other type of 1980s group was Kanye's fourth album compared to other than new wave?
The article about Kanye's fourth album written by Matthew Trammell was published in what magazine?
What is Kanye's fifth album titled? 
What journalist drew comparisons between My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and other Kanye albums?
What musician collaborated with Kanye West for his album Late Registration?
What artist worked with Kanye on his album Graduation?
Kid Cudi joined Kanye for which album?
Which album by Kanye West has been talked about by writers for having maximalist aesthetic?
What did Kanye state that Yeezus was?
What artist did Kanye draw inspiration from when crafting Yeezus?
In what year was Kanye West's sixth album released?
What was the title of Kanye's sixth album?
What did Kanye announce he would release after acquiring a Grammy in 2005?
What finally become of Kanye's clothing line in 2009?
When did Kanye West annouce his Pastelle Clothing line?
What year was Kanye's Pastelle Clothing Line scrapped?
What company worked with Kanye in 2009 to create his own shoe line?
For what brand did Kanye design a shoe meant for Paris Fashion Week?
Form whom was Kanye's 2011 fashion label designed for?
What kind of reviews did Kanye's fashion line spark?
When did Kanye debut his second effort in the fashion world?
On what day was Kanye's women's clothing line debuted?
What was the name of Kanye West's women's clothing line?
On what day was Kanye's women's line premiered at Paris fashion week? 
What was the name of West's fashion line for women?
The fashion line shown in Paris received what sort of reviews?
On what day did West release his second fashion line?
What brand struck a deal with Kanye and sparked a new clothing line?
How many "seasons" of clothing did Kanye release?
What were the shoes designed by Kanye and released by Adidas called?
How many pairs of shoes were sold in the initial release in New York City?
What shoe was announced on Twitter by Kanye West?
In what year did Kanye premier his Season line?
What album release coincided with Kanye's Yeezy Season 3 clothing line?
What restaurant chain did Kanye aspire to open in his native Chicago?
How many restaurants did Kanye open?
What happened to the Fatburger chains that Kanye established?
What was the name of the restaurant Kanye annouced he was opening?
How many  of Kanye's Fatburger restaurants were actually opened?
When was Kanye's last Fatburger restaurant closed?
What is the name of Kanye West's food company?
What did Kanye call the label he founded in 2004?
As of 2015, who did Kanye choose as the new president of GOOD Music?
What year did Kanye West open his GOOD Music production company and record label?
What other artist besides Kanye West and Common was among the first to record at GOOD Music?
Who did Kanye name President of GOOD Music in 2015?
What was the goal of Kanye's new creative company DONDA?
Kanye's creative content company DONDA was named after who?
On what date did Kanye go public with his DONDA company?
What platform was Kanye named  a co-owner of in 2015?
What longtime friend of Kanye acquired Tidal in 2015?
What criticisms of other streaming platforms does Tidal stand to challenge?
What music streaming service is Kanye West a co-owner of?
What is Tidal's specialization?
Which famous rapper bought Aspiro?
What music service is a huge competitor for Tidal?
With the help of his mom, what foundation did Kanye create early in his career?
What is the goal of the Kanye West Foundation?
What was founded by Kanye West and his mother?
In What year did the Kanye West Foundation Partner with Strong American Schools? 
Where was the "Kanye West Foundation" founded?
What other mission besides dropout and illiteracy rates did the Kanye West Foundation seek to improve?
What campaign did the Kanye West Foundation partner with in 2007?
In what month was the inaugural concert held for the "Ed in '08" campaign?
What was the Kanye West Foundation renamed to in 2008?
What year did the foundation end its run?
In what year did Kanye West's mother pass away? 
Kanye's foundation was changed to what name following his mother's death? 
What year did the foundation stop operating? 
What are some charitable efforts Kanye west has participated in?
During what show did Kanye take an opportunity to criticize the efforts of a U.S. President?
Which U.S. President did Kanye criticize after the events of Hurricane Katrina? 
Which President did Kanye West accuse of "Not caring for black people"?
On what day did the Kanye's famous George W. Bush criticism take place?
What happened after Kanye made his controversial statement?
Who did Kanye West say doesn't care about black people?
How did George W. Bush describe Kanye's controversial statement?
To which reporter did Kanye West express regret for his remark about President Bush?
Kanye was criticized by human rights groups for performing in what country?
How much was Kanye paid to perform in Kazakhstan?
How is Kazakhstan's human rights record compared to the rest of the world?
What country's President paid Kanye West to perform at his grandson's wedding?
Kanye, Shakira, and Rage Against the Machine refused to perform in what state due to a new law against illegal aliens?
For what reason did Sting and other artists cancel their scheduled performances in Kazakhstan? 
What TV show lampooned one of Kanye's BBC Radio 1 interviews?
What did Kanye demand from Jimmy Kimmel in regards to the sketch?
What person was Kanye's rant on Twitter directed at?
The skit on JImmy Kimmel Live! was a depiction of Kanye West and what reporter?
On what radio station did Kanye West deem himself "the biggest rockstar on the planet"?
What president did Kanye comment on as having trouble pushing policies while in office?
What type of people did Kanye state had more power than Black people?
On what day did Kanye do an interview about President Obama pushing policies in Washington?
On what day did Kanye take back his original comment about Jews?
What celebrity knee-deep in controversy did Kanye endorse in a 2016 tweet?
What actor was Kanye defending on Twitter in February 2016?
To who did Kanye lose the Best New Artist award in 2004?
The video for what song failed to win an award for again in 2006, leading to an onstage outburst by Kanye?
What artist did Kanye West lose "Best New Artist" to at the 2004 AMAs?
Which Kanye West video failed to win Best Video at the MTV Europe Music Awards?
On what day did Kanye apologize for his ranting at the MTV Europe Awards?
What show did Kanye perform a spoof about the incident at the MTV Europe Awards?
What did Kanye believe was a contributing factor in him not opening for the 2007 MTV VMAs?
With what song did Kanye aspire to open the VMAs with?
What factor did Kanye West accuse of being the reason for his being excluded for the opening of the 2007 VMAs?
What song was Kanye's dream to perform on the VMAs?
What artist's award reception did Kanye interrupt onstage at the 2009 MTV VMAs?
Which U.S. President criticized Kanye for his VMA outburst?
Which President called Kanye West a jackass for his behavior at the 2009 VMAs?
To which artist did Kanye profusely apologize to?
What song did Kanye end up writing that referenced his outburst against Taylor Swift?
When did Kanye West post to Twitter apoloizing to Taylor Swift?
When did Kanye take back his apology to Taylor Swift, saying that he was being "selfless"?
What album by Kanye was released in 2016?
Which artist's award reception did Kanye interrupt at the 57th Grammy Awards?
To who did Kanye state that Beck should hand his award over to?
What artist's acceptance speech did Kanye interrupt by walking on stage at the 57th Grammys?
What day did Kanye apologize to Beck on Twitter?
What award did Kanye capture at the 2015 MTV VMAs?
When does Kanye intend to run for president?
What award was presented to Kanye West on August 30, 2015?
For what event was the largest amount of signatures collected in an attempt to keep Kanye from performing at it?
What was another event that garnered a large amount of protest for Kanye's removal of headliner status?
What website have music fans been using to try to block Kanye West's performance at different events?
What festival was the largest failed petition to keep Kanye from performing?
How many signatures were gathered for Kanye's removal from the 2015 Pan American Games?
Kanye's first engagement was to which well-known designer?
What model did Kanye begin to date in 2008?
Who has Kanye finally settled with an married in 2014?
How many children does Kanye have with Kim?
What year did Kanye West begin his relationship with Alexis Phifer?
When did Alexis Phifer and Kanye West get engaged?
Who did Kanye date from 2008 to 2010?
When did Kanye West start dating Kim Kardashian?
Where in Jerusalem did Kardashian and West have their daughter North baptised?
How old was Kanye's mother when she died?
What doctor did Donda West ignore the recommendation of to invest her heart condition?
At approximately what time did paramedics receive the call about Kanye West's mother, Donda?
What condition along with complications for the plastic surgery caused the death of Donda West?
What doctor originally turned Donda West down for her plastic surgery operation?
What was the name of the doctor who performed the surgery that ended up killing Donda West?
What talk show did the doctor who performed Donda West's plastic surgery appear on?
What was the final cause of Donda's death determined by the coroner?
What was the name of the West's family's attorney during the incident surrounding the death of Donda West?
What reasons did West's family give for filing complaints against Adams and Aboolian?
On what show did Adams appear to "defend himself"?
On what day did the final coroner's report show that Donda died from heart disease and complications from surgery?
Where was Donda West's funeral?
What songs did Kanye dedicate to his late mother as his performance at The O2 in London?
In what city was the funeral and burial for Donda West held?
On what day was the funeral of Donda West?
What day was Kanye's first concert after the death of his mother?
On what tour did Kanye perform "Hey Mama" and his version of Journey's "Don't Stop Believing" in memory of his mother?
Where did Kanye first speak on his mother's death?
Where did Kanye West first speak about his mother's death?
What famous governor signed legislation in honor of Donda West's death?
What governor passed a law in honor of Donda West?
What was the name of the law passed by Arnold Schwarzenegger?
What famous stuntman sued Kanye for purported use of his likeness in 2006?
When was the suit settled?
Which celebrity sued West in 2006 for trademark infrigement?
What was the name of the nickname Kanye West took on in his video "Touch the Sky"?
When did Knievel settle the argument with West?
What was Kanye arrested for in 2008?
How much was Kanye's bail bond?
What was Kanye finally charged with?
On what day was Kanye West arrested at the Los Angeles International Airport?
What were the charges filed against Kanye West?
What was the name of the bodyguard also accused of vandalism?
What was the dollar amount of Kanye's bond?
What was Kanye second arrest for?
What was the date of Kanye's second arrest?
Where was Kanye arrested at for the second time?
At what location did the incident leading to West's second arrest take place?
What paparazzi member did Kanye attack at LAX in 2013?
What was Kanye convicted for after his paparazzi attack?
What was the name of the man who was hassling West outside of LAX that West later attacked?
How many years' probation was Kanye supposed to serve for this altercation?
He had to attend 24 sessions of what kind of therapy?
How many hours of community service did Kanye receive?
What are Kanye's religious beliefs?
"Jesus Walks" was on which of Kanye's albums?
September of 2014, Kanye called himself a what during one of his concerts?
How is Kanye viewed as a 21st century artist?
What famous English artist was Kanye compared to by The Guardian?
What reporter compared Kanye West to a lightning rod?
Who said Kanye West was the greatest hip hop artist of all time?
What magazine compared Kanye to David Bowie?
What overabundance of themes did Kanye criticize early in his career?
The shift away from what genre of rap is Kanye credited for?
What kind of background did Kanye West grow up in?
Who did Kanye West have a sales competition with during his album release of Graduation?
Who said that Kanye West effectively led a new wave of artists that weren't only interested in rapping about gunplay or drug dealing?
A number of artists have cited Kanye as being what to them?
Who complimented West in Time Magazine?
How many songs has Kanye had that have exceeded 3 million digital sales?
How many songs has Kanye sold digitally in his career?
How many of West's six albums have gone platinum?
What was Kanye's fifth consecutive number one album?
As of 2012, how many downloads have there been of "Golddigger"?
What rank is West in total sales for the last decade?
How many total digital songs has Kanye West sold in the US?
How many Grammies has Kanye won as of 2013?
With which artist does Kanye tie with for reaching the top of the annual Pazz & Jop Critic Poll?
How many times has Kanye placed in the annual Time Magazine people list?
In 2013, West had won how many total Grammy Awards?
What rank did About.com give Kanye "Top 50 Hip-Hop Producers" list?
On what day did MTV name Kanye as the year's Number 1 "Hottest MC in the Game."?
December 17, 2010 was the day Kanye was nominated by MTV for what?
What musician did West tie with for topping the annual Pazz & Jop critic poll 4 times each?
How many of Kanye's albums placed on the 2012 Rolling Stone list?
How many of West's albums were included on Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list?
Which one of Kanye's albums won The Pitchfork's Album of the Decade (so far) award?
What place did Yeezus secure on the list of 100 albums?
What online music publication ranked Kanye's album "My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy" as the world's best album so far?
What album was ranked 8 on a list of 100 albums?
What song was ranked third in a list of 200 "best tracks" since 2010?
What President did Kanye West insult on air in 2005?
Whose speech did Kanye West ruin at the 2009 MTV Awards?
What fashion items does Kanye West design?
What company did Kanye West begin?
What year did Kanye West begin working with Adidas?
What branch of government does the prime minister lead?
What group is the prime minister usually in charge of?
In some political models like semi-presidential systems, what does the prime minister manage?
What is a parliamentary model on which other systems have been based?
What kind of role is the head of state in Westminster-based parliamentary governments?
What is a central duty of the prime minister?
What is it called when a monarch has a share of executive powers?
Using royal prerogative does not require the consent of which body?
What are two other job titles of the Prime Minister of the  UK?
In addition to being Prime Minister, what other role did Winston Churchill serve during World War II?
When was the title of prime minister first used?
Who coined the term prime minister?
What country did Richelieu serve as prime minister for?
Who started a tradition of naming the head ministers something other than prime minister?
When did the modern usage of prime minister come into being?
Who was referenced as prime minister in a negative manner when the term was first used in its modern sense?
Who occupied the role that would later become prime minister under Henry VIII?
Who held the equivalent of the post of prime minister under Queen Anne?
Who served as the head minister under Charles II?
From whom did ministers derive their power?
Who was responsible for naming people to serve in the cabinet?
Who are the two ministers used by Queen Anne simultaneously?
Who was exiled when he lost the favor of the monarch?
What 1688 event helped the parliament solidy its power against the monarch?
What 1689 law contributed to parliament's growing power?
What body was incorporated into the government as a result of the Bill of Rights?
The reign of which king was a turning point in the growth of the position of prime minister?
In what year did Queen Anne die?
Where was George I's home?
For how long did Robert Walpole serve as prime minister?
What party did Walpole belong to?
What concept took shape during Walpole's tenure as prime minister?
What would a minister have to do if he did not publicly support a cabinet policy?
Who is another prime minister who reiterated the principles of cabinet solidarity?
Aside from Walpole, who else denied that there was no such thing as the prime minister?
Which kings tried to get power back to the monarchy?
During whose government did prime minister first see use on official state documents?
When was the position of prime minister finally formalized?
In the U.S. and governments modeled on it, who holds executive power?
Which non-elected official has held the longest term as prime minister?
When did Khalifa first take the post of prime minister?
What country does Khalifah serve for as prime minister?
Greece, Finland, Romania and Turkey use what kind of government?
In whic type of government is the leader elected?
What is the term for the head of China's government?
What is another name for the Republic of China?
Whose consent is not required for the Taiwanese premier to take office?
What is the term for a situation in which the president and prime minister come from different political parties?
What can the French parliament cause in order to oust the prime minister?
Which constitution details the role and abilities of the prime minister?
What other considerations are included in the constitution of Bangladesh as regards the prime minister?
What is directly above the premier in the People's Republic of China?
What is the pinyin form of premier?
Which law first referred to the prime minister in Canada?
When was the Constitution Act passed?
The Constitution Act mentions the prime minister in the context of which kinds of other ministers?
What document details the role and abilities given to the prime minister of the Czech Republic?
When was prime minister first mentioned in a government document in the UK?
Who was the last prime minister to serve simultaneously as Chancellor of the Exchequer?
When did Balfour last hold the titles of prime minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer?
Which prime minister was appointed only one time?
When was Thatcher appointed prime minister?
When did Thatcher last hold power?
What did Margaret Thatcher reconfigure following each general election?
What is the name of the prime ministerial position in Ireland?
From where is the Irish prime minister usually selected?
When is the Irish Taoiseach renominated?
Most parliamentary governments need to have the support of what governmental body?
Which political division does not often utilize its power, if it has any?
What kind of referendum can the lower house of parliament take against the government?
Who can put a stop the parliamentary attempts at dissovling itself in some areas?
If the head of state prevents the dissolution of parliament, what needs to happen?
In contemporary parliamentary governments, which official is usually in charge of asking parliament to dissolve?
When was the convention of prime ministers initiating the dissolution of parliament started?
In Ireland, when was the power to dissolve parliament assigned to the prime minister?
The 1922 Irish Free State Constitution previously gave what body the power to dissolve parliament?
What was the Executive Council an alternate name for?
What process signals the need for the prime minister to resign in Australia?
What is the Russian term for prime minister?
What is the Israeli term for prime minister?
What is the term used in spain for prime minister?
What is the Irish term for prime minister?
What is the Italian term for the prime minister?
What is the native term for prime minister in Scandinavia?
What is a term that is used to mean prime minister?
Which countries use the term chancellor to denote the head of government?
What is the head of Monaco's government called?
What is the term for the highest position in government in Vatican City?
What is the head of Iran's government called?
In what kinds of nations can the head of government attain the title of Excellency?
What honorific title can be given to prime ministers in commonwealth nations?
What are British prime ministers part of that grants them the title Right Honourable?
What is an example of a country where prime ministers can be called Right Honourable solely because of their position?
What kind of government is in operation in the United Kingdom?
What are the heads of government in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland called?
What is the Indian term for Prime Minister?
What is the term for prime minister in Pakistan?
What does Wazir-e-Azam mean in English?
What is the head of government's office called in Canada?
What is the head of government's office called in the UK?
What's a common abbreviation for the term institute of technology?
In what century did the term polytechnic first show up?
What school founded in 1794 first used a form of the word polytechnic in its name?
What language does the French word polytechnique come from?
What word means the same thing as "institute of technology"?
What was the first institute of technology in the world?
What war led to the increased popularity of institutes of technology and polytechnics?
What was the founding name of the Braunschweig University of Technology?
In what year was the cole Polytechnique founded?
What kind of institutions do countries like Germany and Switzerland consider institutes of technology to be?
In what year were polytechnics in the UK given the university designation?
What is the name of the Royal Polytechnic Institution now?
What street is the University of Westminster on?
What term was used in some countries to describe select universities that focus on technological education in applied science and engineering?
What name did some universities switch to in the 1990s for marketing purposes?
What system were institutes of technology a part of during the seventies, eighties, and early nineties?
What's the four-letter abbreviation for technically minded technical and further education institutes?
What is the new name of the Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE?
TAFE Tasmania started a three-year restructuring in what year?
In Australia, how many universities are recognized as Universities of Technology?
What's the German word for a tertiary education institution?
In addition to Bachelor's degrees, what other kind of degree can one earn from a Fachhochschule?
What term is used in Belgium and the Netherlands to refer to an institution like a German Fachhochschule?
What term refers to the process that a hogeschool undergoes before it's able to award Master's degrees?
How many institutes of technology in the Netherlands have converted into full-fledged universities in the past few decades?
How many Technical Universities are there in the Netherlands today?
What country has Institutes of Technology/Polytechnic Institutes from which students can earn certificates, diplomas, and degrees?
What are polytechnic divisions of national universities called in Canada?
In what city is the cole Polytechnique de Montral located?
In addition to private equity and industry sources, what's a third source of research funding for institutions of higher learning in Canada?
What is Canada's national alliance of 11 research-focused schools called?
What kind of projects does Polytechnics Canada sponsor that can lead to technology commercialization?
In what year was the Imperial Tientsin University founded in China?
What was the first university to offer courses in liberal arts?
What portion of China's elite universities still have a primary polytechnical focus today?
What year did Croatia pass a law regarding polytechnic education?
What institution is in charge of tracking volcanic activity in the Galpagos Islands?
What observatory is the National Observatory of Ecuador?
What school oversees the Quito Astronomical Observatory?
When was the Quito Astronomical Observatory founded?
EPN's Nuclear Science Department is among how many of its kind in Ecuador?
If the mission is achieved, professionals will apply what they've learned to what goal?
MIT raised money to cover tuition, room and board for what number of students?
What's the equivalent of Universities of Technology in French-speaking areas?
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. (Tech.) degree before the Bologna Process?
How many credits were needed for an M.Sc. from a traditional university prior to the Bologna Process?
In what country are polytechnic schools designated uniquely from academic universities?
What word means polytechnic school in Finnish?
What's the Swedish word for a polytechnic school?
Universities that encompass several engineering schools provide curricula in sciences and what other field?
What are an institute of technology called in France?
What's the three-letter acronym for institut universitaire de technologie?
What's the term in German for what those in French-speaking Switzerland call haute cole specialise?
In Eastern Europe, what is the word for an institute of technology?
What century in France's history included the French cole polytechnique that influenced education systems in other countries?
What term in Brasil and Spain refers to a polytechnic institute?
Fachhochschulen first came about in the early years of what decade?
Fachhochschulen favor an education in what, as opposed to research?
In addition to technology, Fachhochschulen offer courses in social science, medicine, design, and what other discipline?
What's the abbreviation for a Technische Universitt?
What's the main focus of a Technische Universitt?
Which department's faculty can be associated with university hospitals?
How many Technische Universitten make up the TU9 German Institutes of Technology?
How many institutes of technology are there in Germany?
What's the approximate number of students in Germany who are enrolled in a university of technology?
Which German state has the highest ratio of universities of technology to standard universities?
What's the joint project of TU Clausthal, TU Braunschweig, and the University of Hanover called?
What's the name of the Act that changed how Greek public institutes of technology were designated?
What was the very first polytechnic school in Hong Kong?
What was the original name of Hong Kong Polytechnic?
In what year was the City Polytechnic of Hong Kong founded?
What Hong Kong university was created in 1991?
When did the two polytechnic schools in Hong Kong receive status as universities?
What kind of mining did the world's first institute of technology prepare students for?
What's the founding year of the first institute of technology ever?
Who established the Berg-Schola?
How many private institutes of technology are there in India?
How many government-affiliated institutes of technology are there in India?
What organization oversees India's technical education institutions?
What's the name of the diploma awarded in India for technical or vocational coursework?
How many government-owned public institutes of technology does Indonesia have?
Rather than four-year Bachelor's degrees, Politeknik offer a diploma after how many years?
What was the original name of Ireland's Institute of Technology system?
What Irish institute of technology evolved independently of the Regional Technical College System?
What term in higher education refers to technical universities that award engineering degrees?
Traditionally, how many Politecnici were there?
What city houses the headquarters of the Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia?
What college was the forerunner for the engineering faculty at the University of Tokyo?
What area of discipline do Japan's institutes of technology specialize in?
What country has operated polytechnic institutes for nearly 44 years?
What international organization partnered with Malaysia's Ministry of Education in 1969?
In what city in the state of Perak is the Politeknik Ungku Omar located?
How many polytechnic institutes does Malaysia have now?
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2009?
How many students were enrolled in polytechnic schools in Malaysia in 2012?
What's the name of Mauritius's sole technical university?
What's the focus of Mauritius's University of Technology's specialized mission?
What country considers their polytechnics, universities, and colleges state-owned institutions?
What does UCOL stand for?
In what year was the Education Act originally passed in New Zealand?
What school did Massey University combine with?
In what decade did New Zealand's tertiary education institutions begin consolidation?
What school considered a merger with Waikato Institute of Technology that was later abandoned?
What island was Waiarapa Polytechnic located on before it merged with UCOL?
What's the only polytechnic school in New Zealand to be designated a university?
In Pakistan, a student's tests in what grade determine their admission to a diploma program?
What are people being trained for, mainly, in Pakistan's polytechnic institutes?
How many years does it usually take to earn a diploma from polytechnic schools in Pakistan?
What two-letter abbreviation is used for undergraduate engineering  courses?
What's Pakistan's program called that's comparable to the British A Level?
What word do they use in Poland for an institute of technology?
What is the Portuguese word for the short-cycle degrees awarded prior to 1988?
What process was instituted in 2007 that brought Master's degrees to the polytechnic education system?
What's the name of Singapore's centralized institute that students can attend before university?
How many polytechnics are there in Singapore?
How many years of study would it take to obtain a degree from a polytechnic in Singapore?
What queen set up the Bansk Akadmia?
What year was the Bansk Akadmia founded?
The Bansk Akadmia was originally intended for training workers in what two precious metals?
What year did teaching start at the Bansk Akadmia?
What are the university buildings still standing at the Bansk Akadmia used for now?
What are polytechnics called in South Africa?
What year did Technikons gain the ability to give out technology degrees?
When did Technikons start being integrated with traditional South African universities?
Most institutes of technology in Thailand were born out of what other type of institutions?
What type of degree were Thailand's technical colleges historically not allowed to confer?
What's the new name of Pathumwan Technical School?
What did the Thonburi Technology Institute become after its name change?
What was the previous name of Rajamangala University of Technology?
What is the name of Thammasat University's engineering school?
What is Thailand's only government-established and owned institute of technology?
What year was Suranaree University of Technology founded?
What is the name of the best-known private institute of technology in Thailand?
What institute of technology opened in Bursa in 2010?
When Konya Technical University opens, how many total institutes of technology will there be in Turkey and the Ottoman Empire?
What two cities in Turkey acquired institutes of technology in the 1950s?
What year did UK polytechnics start functioning in a binary education system?
What organization validates degrees received from polytechnic schools?
What two-word term does Scotland use to describe their technological universities?
What was the first polytechnic in Britain originally named?
How many Institutes of Science and Technology were affiliated with the University of Wales?
What was the name Loughborough University was known by from 1966 to 1996?
In what decade did colleges of technology gain the University designation?
What act allowed polytechnic schools to become universities?
The Further and Higher Education Act 1992 allows polytechnics to award degrees without what organization's approval?
If a technical institute is affiliated with a local university, what does its designation become?
What century brought the advent of technical schools or technical institutes?
A student would attend a technical institute before a university or polytechnic but after what?
In what year was Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute founded?
Which of the three earliest technological universities was founded most recently, in 1861?
What type of economy was technical education in Venezuela intended to support?
When did Venezuela begin to create institutes of technology?
What city in Venezuela had the first IUT?
Who pioneered using the French system of technological education?
What language does the word "symbiosis" come from?
What type of organism did Frank apply the term "symbiosis" to?
What nationality was Heinrich Anton de Bary?
How long did it take for scientists to stop using the narrow definition of symbiosis?
What is the type of symbiotic relationship where two organisms can't survive without each other?
What is the type of symbiotic relationship where the symbionts can live together but can also survive alone?
What is an example of an obligate relationship?
What is an example of ectosymbiosis?
What is it called when the organisms are not physically joined?
What is it called when one symbiont lives within its partner?
What do bacterial endosymbionts give necessary nutrition to?
What is the name of a bacteria inside of tree roots?
What endosymbionts live in coral? 
What organisms are described as living on the surface of whales?
Name a parasitic ectosymbiont.
What is another name for ectosymbiosis?
What is another term for mutualism?
Of what duration are symbiotic relationships?
What type of relationship do herbivores have with the bacteria in their intestines?
What do coral and algae produce together?
How do plants contribute to terrestrial ecosystems?
What type of fungus draws liquid and minerals out of the earth?
What lives with Ritteri sea anemones?
What prevents the clownfish from being stung?
What type of relationship do the clownfish and anemone have?
What species does this shrimp have a relationship with?
What part of the fish is used to signal danger?
What type of symbiosis seen between bryozoans and hermit crabs?
When were the worms found?
What does the bacteria give the worm?
What land is near the worms' first known location?
What is given to the host cell?
What does the host make that affect its genes?
In what manner are the described genetic alternations given to future generations?
What is the main alteration in an endosymbiont when it adapts to a host?
What is the term that describes the way the endosymbiont can't go back to its original phenotype?
What does the article say could be the reason for the buildup of harmful mutations?
What language do the roots of "commensal" come from?
What type of symbiotic relationship helps one organism and doesn't have a major affect on the other?
What is the term for a relationship where one organism provides a dwelling for the other?
What type of relationship is it when arachnids attach webs to dead plants?
In what type of relationship does an organism travel by means of another?
Antagonistic or antipathetic symbiosis are alternate names for what?
What is it called when organisms are lethal to their host?
What is it called when parasites need their host to live?
What proportion of animals go through a parasitic stage?
Name a biotrophic organism.
What is the name for the kind of symbiosis in which one organism is seriously harmed and there is no affect on the other?
What kinds of amensalism are there?
When a large tree takes the resources a young tree needs, what type of amensalism is it?
What does the black walnut give out that kills plants?
What organisms is the ibex in an amensalistic relationship with?
What does the Spanish ibex eat?
What type of relationship is it when large animals crush small plants?
What type of relationship harms both organisms?
What is the ultimate result of synnecrosis?
How common is synnecrosis in the natural world?
Why do bees sting even though it will kill them?
What far-reaching result do scientists think has come about from symbiosis with bacteria?
What are eukaryotes?
What does Margulis think is the main driver of evolution?
Who agrees with Margulis' cooperative view of evolution?
How big a part did symbiosis have in the development of flowering plants and their pollinators?
What did some plants produce when flowers became less simple?
What is the word for the kind of relationship in which a plant depend on a single type of insect?
What is used a main source of light for a building during the day?
What kind of effects can natural illumination have on a persons psychological?
Using natural illumination instead of artificial light sources help with what?
Lamps and light fixtures are a form of what?
The use of light to achieve an aesthetic effect is know as?
What can be used a main source of light for a building during the day?
Lamps and light fixtures  are a form of what?
What kind of effects can proper lighting have on a persons psychologically?
What does using natural illumination instead of artificial lighting help with?
What is the used to achieve a practical effect?
What type of fixtures do you use for indoor lighting?
What is considered a key part of interior design?
What can be a intrinsic component of landscaping?
What type of fixtures are used typically used for indoor lighting?
What can be used as a intrinsic component of landscape projects?
When was fluorescent lighting first available?
What type of lighting can be mounted in the ceiling to appear flush?
Peking man kindled fire as early as?
Which type of oily animals where also used as lamps after being threaded with wick?
What is considered the earliest form of artificial lighting?
The hollow worked stones lamps found in Lascaux caves date back how far?
What type of lighting was powered by electricity?
When did gas powered street lights became economically available.
Street lights help reduce?
What can come in a wide variety of styles for various functions?
Functioning as holder a light fixture can provide directed light and avoid?
Luminous efficacy is measure in what unit?
How many Kelvins is daylight measured at?
What has a color temperature around 2800 to 3000 Kelvin?
It can be said that lights with a high color temperature have more energy in what color spectrum?
A lamp with more energy in the yellow and red spectrum are known to be?
A light is classified by intended purpose, what mainly changes its classification?
Who invented track lighting?
What feeds all the fixtures in low voltage tracks instead of each light having a line-to-low voltage transformer.
What  type of lighting uses lights that are hung or clipped to bare metal cables?
How many volts does a track lighting system usually use?
What is a uplight used for ambient lighting?
What is one type of fixture commonly found in offices?
Magnifier lamps are considered what type of lighting? 
When would neon lighting be considered general lighting?
What uses diffuser panels below fluorescent lights?
Normally neon lighting is considered what type of lighting?
What do steps in move theater aisles have for safety markings?
What are the low wattage lamps being replaced with in movie theaters?
What kind of tube are the movie theaters lights enclosed in?
What is used to light walkways at night?
What kind of lights are being designed for energy efficiency?
What kind of light is used to illuminate outdoor playing fields at night?
Extremely bright lights used to deter crime are called?
What type of light would be used illuminate the entrance to a property?
What color are tail lights?
What color are headlamps on a vehicle?
When did automakers start using electroluminescent technology to backlight gauges?
What color are reversing indicator lamps?
What indicates that a driver is intending to change position?
What is the removable and replaceable part of a light fixture?
What does a light bulb convert into electromagnetic radiation?
Huge much light does a 13 W compact fluorescent lamp produce equivalent to a incandescent light bulb.
How many lemuns does a 15 watt fluorescent lamp produce?
What is designing as it applies to built environments?
Would you consider aesthetic elements alone in architectural lighting design?
What is the name of the software sometimes used to help calculate lighting needs in a built environment?
Hand-calculations are based off of what type of data?
What type of factor calculation can be used to find out how much daylight is received in a internal space.
What type of paint tends to absorb light?
What kind of paint makes a room a room look larger and brighter?
What type of study is used to simulate lighting designs?
What is prepared prior to the performance for the lighting operator?
Motion pictures employee the similar lighting techniques as which other form of lighting?
What is the basic SI unit of measurement?
What is the SI unit for lumiance?
What is the CGS unit of lumiance?
What is the amount of useful light emitted from a luminous flux measured in? 
What is a standardized model of human visual brightness?
What is the SI unit of illuminace and luminous emittance?
What does UGR stand for?
What does CCT stand for?
What does CRI stand for?
What metric indicates a lights ability to make object appear natural?
What metric indicates "warmth" or "coolness"?
What does GAI stand for?
The relative separating of object colors illuminated by a light source is known as?
Would a lower GAI mean higher apparent saturation or vividness of object colors?
What is typically used to measure light?
What measures the amount of light entering the eye?
A Daysimeter what type of personal meter?
How many days can the Daysimeter gather for analysis?
What type of light stimulates the circadian system?
What is a basic concept of deciding how much illumination is required for a given task? 
What can help reduce energy and usage cost by providing light only when or where it is needed? 
What type of standard do newer control systems use? 
What is the name of one type of control system used? 
Does a wireless mesh open standard make installation harder?
What sensor controls light with motion sensors? 
What does a passive infrared sensor react to? 
What type of sensor transmits sound above the range of human hearing?
Would you want to use passive infrared sensor in a area requiring 360-degree coverage?
What is the oldest method of interior lighting? 
Daylighting has been proven to have negative effects on people?
What is a form of solid state lighting?
What is the best way to control light emissions of LEDs?
What can cause health effects such headache frequency?
Maximizing the right amount of light at the appropriate time for elderly may help systems of what? 
The human circadian system is entrained to how many hours light-dark pattern?
What happens to the natural carcidan cycle when light-dark patterns are disrupted?
Who documented 23 surgical patients assigned rooms looking out on a natural scene?
Did the patients with natural scenes have longer postoperative hospital stays?
Did patients that have natural scenes require more potent analgesics?
What University was Alision Jing Xu the assistant professor of management at?
What Univerity was Aparna Labroo associated with?
What devised a method where kerosene could be distilled from petroleum?
What year was it discovered that petroleum could be distilled into kerosene? 
What method of lighting have been used since 1820s?
What does CFL stand for?
Are all CFLs suitable for dimming?
How much more power does a standard incandescent bulb use compared to LED?
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?
What is the average lifetime of a CFL?
How much power does a halogen lamp save compared to a standard blub?
What is known as artificial light that is excessive or intrusive?
What causes sharp shadows around buildings? 
In a battlefield does not have natural light what could you use instead? 
The use of what may disclose your own hidden position on a battlefield? 
Modern warfare has seen the increased use of what? 
What can be used by military for targeting?
What has eliminated the need for flares on a battlefield?
What does the CIE stand for?
What does the IESNA stand for? 
Who else publishes along with IESNA? 
What defines photo metric data?
What does IALD stand for?
What does PLDA stand for?
What was the PLDA formerly known as?
Who offers the Lighting Certification Examination? 
What does NCQLP stand for?
Which abbreviation can you append to your name after becoming Lighting Certified?
What other national examinations are available?
What does PLASA stand for? 
Where is PLASA based?
How many individuals does PLASA represent?
What does RoHS stand for?
Which three statistics does the HDI compile?
Does a high ranking on the HDI indicate shorter or longer life expectancy?
Who developed the HDI?
What entity publishes the HDI?
Does a high ranking on the HDI indicate shorter or longer life expectancy at birth?
In what year did the Human Development Report introduce the IHDI?
What does IHDI stand for?
Which measures the potential development, the HDI or the IHDI?
Which measures the potential development, the HDI or the IHDI?
In what year did Mahbub ul Haq devise and launch the HDI?
Who was initially opposed to the idea of creating the HDI?
Mahbub ul Haq was hoping to shift the focus of development economics to what type of policies?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2011 report?
What does LE stand for?
What does MYS stand for?
What does EYS stand for?
What does GNIpc stand for?
What entity makes the defining formula for the HDI well-known?
On what date was the 2015 Human Development Report released?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2015 report?
On what date was the 2014 Human Development Report released?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2014 report?
What does the IHDI specifically take into account?
Does the IHDI measure the "average" or the "potential" level of human development? 
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
Is the top quartile of HDI considered "high" or "very high" human development?
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2014 report?
Which East Asian dictatorship was excluded from the 2014 report?
On what date was the 2013 Human Development Report released?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2013 report?
Does the IHDI measure the "average" or the "potential" level of human development?
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2011 report?
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2011 report?
Which East Asian dictatorship was excluded from the 2011 report?
On what date was the 2010 Human Development Report released?
Which year was used for estimates in the 2010 report?
In the IHDI, inequality is factored into what three human development dimensions?
Which Caribbean nation is in the top quartile of HDI (but missing IHDI)?
What is the main reason that countries were excluded from the 2010 report?
Which Caribbean nation protested its exclusion from the 2010 report?
What ranking has Cuba been given since the situation with the missing data was addressed?
On what date was the 2009 Human Development Report released?
What period is covered by the 2009 Human Development Report?
What was another title for the 2009 Human Development Report?
What new category was added in the 2009 Human Development Report?
How does the 2009 Human Development Report refer to countries that rank "very high"?
What three reasons were mentioned for countries being excluded?
What type of update was released on December 18, 2008?
What was the index published on December 18, 2008 lacking?
What period was covered by the statistical update index released in December of 2008?
On what date was the 2007/2008 Human Development Report released?
What was the focus of the 2007/2008 Human Development Report?
What is the most recent year that was included in the 2007/2008 Human Development Report?
The HDI in the 2007/2008 Human Development Report is for what year?
Where was the 2007/2008 Human Development Report launched?
Which countries experienced a decrease in HDI?
Under what number does a country need to fall in order to be considered a "low development" country?
On which continent are all 22 of the low development countries located?
What is Gabon's ranking?
What is South Africa's ranking?
What are the two highest ranking Sub-Saharan countries?
What number indicates the minimum score for a country to be considered a "high development" country?
Which South American country was included among the seven promoted countries?
What is the largest country that was included among the seven promoted countries?
If there is a decrease in a country's ranking, which indicator will be present?
If there is an increase in a country's ranking, which indicator will be present?
If a country's ranking does not change, which indicator will be present?
Which country has been ranked highest the most number of times?
Which country has received the top rank twice?
The HDI has been criticized for focusing exclusively on what?
Has the HDI been criticized for being biased towards Western or towards Eastern models of development?
The HDI has been criticized for lack of what type of perspective on development?
Critics of the HDI cite its focus on which: egalitarianism or authoritarianism?
How many economists were cited as pointing out data errors in the HDI?
In what year did the UNDP respond to the criticism of its report?
Which magazine publication carried a statement from the Human Development Report Office in January, 2011?
How many countries were included in the 2009 HDI?
How many countries were included in the 2010 HDI?
What was the first name of Sony Music Entertainment, Inc?
In what year was it renamed Columbia Recording Corporation?
In what year was it known as CBS Records?
In what year did it land the name, Sony Music Entertainment?
What company is the only group larger than Sony Music Entertainment?
In what year did SME merge with another company?
What was the name of the other company that SME merged with?
What did the company call themselves after the  merger?
In what year did Sony BMG Music Entertainment go back to being called SME?
In what year did ARC form?
In what year did Columbia Phonography Company form?
In what year did ARC take over Columbia Phonography Company?
Who bought out ARC?
In what year was ARC bought?
What did CBS call ARC after buying it?
Who was the head of CBS at the time?
Who convinced Paley to buy ARC?
In what year was Epic Records created?
What company created Epic Records?
Who was one of the creators of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences?
What did Conkling later go on to lead?
What type of music was Date Records known for?
In what year was Mercury Records (US) bought out?
Who acquired Mercury Records (US)?
What is the name of CBS' Mexican record label?
What 4 areas of the country did Columbia Records have manufacturers in?
What lable was bought by CBS in the UK?
CBS began thinking of a name change to their record label in what year?
Date Records gave rise to the group "Peaches and Herb" in what year?
Date Records released what major success in 1969?
What place on the charts did Date Records' big success land on?
Despite the success, in what year did Date Records cease to exist?
Who ran CBS-Columbia Group starting in 1966?
In what year did CBS and Sony come together?
In what year did CDs come to the American market?
In what year was Clive Davis let go at CBS Records Group?
How many people signed a petition to boycott Sony Music in 2016?
What search engine company giant has Sony sent requests to regarding content on a website?
What website does Sony have complaints against?
In what year did Sony pull out of the Greek market?
What label for the Greek market were artists on under the Sony umbrella?
In what year did Sony shut down their offices in the Philippines?
What famous music producer became CEO of Epic Records?
Who joined the CEO of Epic Records in becoming the CEO of Sony Music?
In what year did he become the CEO of Sony Music?
Who became the CEO of RCA Records?
What labels did RCA disband in 2011?
Name 3 artists that CBS Associated Records signed on in the 80s and 90s?
In what year did CBS sell CBS Songs?
How much was the sale of CBS Songs?
Who were the 3 people who bought CBS Songs?
In what year was CBS the only network to also have a record company?
What label did ABC sell in 1979?
What label did NBC sell in 1986?
Who bought RCA?
In what year did SCA buy CBS Records?
Who was the biggest artist that CBS had?
How much did SCA pay for CBS Records?
In what year did the CBS Corporation begin another CBS Records?
Who distributes CBS Records material?
In what year did CBS Records buy out Tree International Publishing?
How much did CBS Records pay for Tree International Publishing?
In what city was Tree International Publishing located?
In what year did CEO of RCA/Jive Barry Weiss leave?
What company did Barry Weiss move to?
When did Barry Weiss become CEO of RCA/Jive?
When did Barry Weiss become head of Jive Records?
Who was promoted to Executive VP of Label Strategy in 2011?
Who became President of Global Digital Business and US Sales in 2012?
In what year did Sony and BMG Germany merge?
In what year did Sony take BMG's half stake in the company?
Name one of the final albums to ever have the Sony BMG label?
When was Sony's new logo revealed to the public?
What labels strove to support indie labels and music rightsholders?
In what year did they partner in order to do so?
Who did Sony partner with to create the biggest deal ever?
How much was the partnership worth?
In what year was the partnership initiated?
Columbia Pictures has been owned by Sony since what year?
Who is the CCO of Sony Music?
In what year did the merger take place?
In what year did the name Sony Music Entertainment become the new name of Sony's record label?
In what year did CBS Associated become Epic Associated?
What is the only country where Sony has no rights to the Columbia label?
Who owns the rights to the Columbia label in Japan?
What does ISP stand for?
what does an isp do?
What forms can an isp be organized in?
What type of organization provides internet access?
What are some services provided by an isp?
Why was the internet developed?
when was the internet developed?
what happened to the internet in the late 1980s?
When were remaining restrictions on the internet removed?
how long after the introduction of the world wide web was 1995?
Where were the first isps established?
where was the first commercial isp in the us located? 
when was the first commercial isp customer served?
when were the first commercial isps established?
what was the name of the first commercial isp in the us?
What would the absence of net neutrality permit? 
what may possibly be a solution to net neutrality concerns? 
how did president obama recommend to classify the internet? 
what did the fcc choose to apply to the internet? 
what would the internet be classified as based on title ii? 
When did the FCC rule on net neturality?
How did the FCC rule on net neutrality?
what did the FCC adopt for the internet? 
what amendment did the chairman of the FCC compare this ruling to? 
what did the FCC chairman say both the internet and the first amendment stand for?
When did the FCC publish its final rule on net neutrality regulations?
What do ISPs provide?
how do isps provide internet access?
what is one type of technology used to connect to the internet? 
what type of technology is used to connect to the internet wirelessly? 
what was an earlier technology used to connect to the internet? 
what traditional options were available for users and small businesses? 
what is it called when fiber-optics are used for end users?
who is served by dial-up, dsl, adsl, cable modems, or isdns?
What type of customers would typically have more demanding requirements? 
what does atm stand for in relation to internet providers? 
what is high-speed dsl used for? 
what is SONET? 
What is a mailbox provider? 
What is an organization that provides hosting of electronic mail domains? 
what is the purpose of a mailbox provider? 
how does a user store electronic mail?
What is SMTP?
What is IMAP?
How is access to mail provided? 
what are most mailbox providers as well? 
who possibly controls their own mail servers? 
What do internet hosting services provide? 
Who provides a virtual server service?
who provides cloud services?
Who does an ISP pay for internet access?
Why does an ISP need to pay an upstream ISP?
What does an upstream ISP provide for an ISP?
what usually has a larger network, the ISP of the customer or the upstream ISP?
What is the simplest case of an ISP using an upstream ISP? 
what do transit ISPs provide? 
A mode of interconnection is often cascaded multiple times until reaching what?
What is a PoP?
What provides bandwidth for the connecting of hosting ISPs and access ISPs?
What is a VISP?
What do VISPs resemble? 
What do visps purchase services from? 
What are free ISPs?
What do free ISPs display in exchange for service?
What are free ISPs similar to? 
How are freenets run? 
What is a WISP? 
What technology is part of a WISP?
What are some bands that Wi-Fi can operate over? 
What is a wireless internet service provider's network based on?
What is peering? 
What does peering allow? 
Why is peering used? 
What are IXs? 
Where do multiple ISPs connect? 
Is a tradeoff between efficiency and cost possible? 
What sort of route does data follow? 
What are ISPs subject to monitoring by in some countries? 
What is the controversial N.S.A. program used in the U.S.?
What does PRISM do? 
What do ISPs integrate into their network to provide information to intelligence agencies? 
What do DCSnet in the US and SORM in Russia do? 
What is the capital of Massachusetts?
What is the approximate population for 2014?
How many square miles does Boston cover?
What was the population of Boston in 2014
How many square miles is Boston?
What place is Boston in for largest city in the US?
Which of the United States is Boston located in?
How many square miles is the city proper of Boston?
The large metropolitan area of Boston is also called what?
What is the estimated population of Greater Boston?
What is the capital and largest city in Massachusetts?
When was Boston founded?
Where was Boston Founded?
List one major event that took place in Boston.
How many people visit Faneuil Hall annually?
What year was Boston founded?
What is the name of the peninsula Boston was founded on?
Bostons rich history attracts many what each year?
The Faneuil Hall draws over how many tourists to Boston each year?
What ranks in the top of the country for investment?
Households in Boston claim the highest average rate of what in the United States?
Bostons businesses rank top in the country for what?
Where does Boston rank as far as cost of living in the United States?
How does Boston rank on world livability?
Boston is internationally known for education and medicine because of its many what?
What was the name before the city was called Boston?
What did Boston's early settlers call the area?
What does Trimountaine mean?
What year was the city renamed Boston?
Who named the city Boston?
What were the puritan colonists searching for when they came to Boston?
What year was the Cambridge Agreement signed?
America's first public school was founded in Boston in what year?
Who was Massachusetts first governor?
How many french and Indian wars did Boston participate in?
Who led the signing of the Cambridge Agreement?
Boston became one of the wealthiest international ports after what war?
What long held tradition helped make Boston a wealthy port?
Boston was the location of many important events of what war?
What act was put in place during the Napoleonic wars and the war of 1812?
What act cut down on Boston's harbor activity?
What became an important part of the city's economy during the Napoleonic Wars and the war of 1812?
In what century was manufacturing more important to Boston than trade?
When did Boston stop being known for it's garment production and leather goods?
What was the name given to old Boston families?
Who came to be known as the nation's social elites?
Boston was admired for what kind of life?
Boston improved culturally because of its generous what?
Boston was overtaken by Salem, Massachusetts in what type of trade? 
What movement did Boston become the center of after it stopped slave trade?
What law involving slaves did the city react strongly to?
What President attempted to make an example out of Boston due to it's view on the Anthony Burns Fugitive Slave Case?
What was the City of Boston's name before it was the City of Boston?
What year was the name changes to the City of Boston?
Boston was chartered as what in 1822?
What was the population of Boston in 1822?
How many square miles was the city in 1822?
How did Boston's population change in the 1820's?
The first Europen immigrants arrival changed what in Boston?
What was the estimated population of Irish people living in Boston in 1850?
What religion did Irish and Italian immigrants bring with them to Boston?
What is Bostons largest religious group today?
What was used to fill a mill pond that became the Haymarket Square?
What sits on Beacon Hill today?
What famous disaster happened in Boston in 1872?
What was the rubble from the Great Boston Fire used for?
During what century did businesses move out of Boston to find cheaper labor?
Projects to renew the city were put into place by what?
How did the people of Boston react to the demolition of the West End?
What year did the first community health center in the US open?
Where was Colombia Point Health Center located?
In 1990, the Colombia Point Health Center was renamed what?
The New York Times bought what famous Boston newspaper?
Who bought FleetBoston Financial?
What year did Bank of America buy FleetBoston Fonancial?
Two Boston department stores merged to form what Cincinnati based department store?
What department stores merged to form Macy's?
On what date did bombs go off at the Boston marathon?
At what point of the Marathon were the bombs exploded?
How many fatalities were there at the marathon?
About how many people were injured in the explosion?
What is the total area of Boston?
How many square miles of land is Boston?
How many square miles of water is Boston?
How many feet above sea level is the City of Boston?
Boston is the only state capital in the contiguous US to have what type of coastline?
What is the name of the region that surrounds Boston?
What river seperates Boston from Charlestown?
What direction from Boston is Boston Harbor?
Calf Island and Green Island are considered part of what National Recreation Area?
What s Boston sometimes called?
How many neighborhoods are in Boston?
What division of the City Government designated the 23 neighborhoods?
How much of Inner Bostons land area did not exist when the city was founded?
The modern land area was created by the gradual filling in of surrounding what?
Tremont Street is named after what original hill in Boston?
A train full of gravel came from Needham to fill what?
The Boston Public Library is located in what part of Boston?
Most of the city lies in which USDA plant hardiness zone?
What minimizes the influence of the Atlantic ocean on Bostons weather?
What is the hottest month in Boston?
What is the coldest month in Boston?
On what coast is Boston located?
What type of weather systems in Boston can produce much snow and rain?
What is the average rainfall in the City of Boston per year?
What is the average snowfall per year in the City of Boston?
When does most snowfall occur?
During what seasons is fog common in Boston?
When can tropical storms and hurricanes threaten Boston?
Sea breezes occur during what season?
What months do thunderstorms occur in Boston?
What is the average hours of sunshine per year in Boston?
About what was the population of Boston in 2010?
How many housing units were there in Boston in 2010?
How many people are in Boston during work hours?
What can the population of Boston rech during special events?
What is the density of Boston's population?
What percentage of the City of Bostons population is 19 and under?
What percentage of the City of Boston's population is 20 to 24?
What percentage of the City of Bostons population is 25 to 44?
What percentage of the City of Bostons residents are 45 to 64?
What percentage of the City of Boston's residents are over 65?
What is the average household income in Boston?
What is the average family income in Boston?
What is the average income for a full time male worker?
What is the average income for a full time female worker?
What percent of families fall below the poverty line?
What percent of Boston's population was white in 1950?
In 2000, what percen tof the population were non hispanic and white?
What year did minorities become the majority of the population for the first time?
In recent years, the whote population has begun to move where?
What year did non hispanic whites once again become the majority of the population?
What people form the largest ethnic group in the city?
What percentage of the city's population is Irish?
What is the second largest ethnic group in the city?
What percentage of the citys population is italian?
How many Chinese Americans lived in Boston City proper in 2013?
How many Jewish people live in the City of Boston?
How many Jewish people live in the Boston Metro area?
What is the total number of congregations in Boston?
What adjascent communities also hold a high Jewish population?
What is the estimated percentage of the population of Brookline and newton that are jewish?
What neighborhoos has a high rate of hispanics?
How many hispanics live in the City of Boston?
How many Puerto Rican hispanics live in greater Boston?
How many Mexican hispanics live in greater Boston?
How many Colombians live in greater Boston?
In 2014, what percentage of the city identified as Christian?
In 2014, what percentage of the city identified as Protestant?
In 2014, what percent of the City of Boston was Catholic?
In 2014, what percentage of Bostons residents did not claim to belong to any religion?
In 2014, other religions mad eup what percentage of the citys population?
How many member attended the Catholic Church in the Boston area in 2010?
How many Catholic churches were in the Boston area in 2010?
How many Episcopal churches were in the Boston Metro area in 2010?
What Boston church is one of the oldest congregations in the US?
What year was Old South Church organized?
What rank does Boston hold as far as being an economically powerful city in the world?
What is the economy of Boston?
What ranking in the country does Greater Boston metro hold as far as economy?
What ranking in the world does greater Boston metro hold as far as economy?
How many college students does Boston attract?
Students from around the world contribute how much a year to Bostons economy?
Because of the number of tech companies, the city is a hub for what?
The Milken Institute rated Boston as the top what in the country?
Of all cities in the US, Boston received the highest amount of funding from where?
The city is innovative becaus eit has access to what type of capital?
There is a  high presence of what type of company in the city?
Route 128 and Greater Boston are centers for what type of investment?
What remains an important sector?
A large part of Boston's economy is made up of what?
How many tourists visited Boston in 2011?
How much did tourists spend in Boston in 2011?
What year did the number of Tourists from china and the UK top the list?
Mutual funds and insurance are what type of industry?
What Boston investment firm helped make mutual funds popular in the 1980's?
What helped make Boston one of the top financial cities in the US?
Boston is the center for what type of capital firms?
In 2016, GE Corporation decided to move its global headquarters to where?
How many students are in Boston Public schools?
How many schools are in Boston?
What is the oldest public high school in the US?
What percentage of Bostons public students are African American?
How many member of the Association of American Universities are in Boston?
How many students are enrolled in boston and Cambridge?
Who is the citys fourth largest employer?
Babson College is what type of institution?
What small private law school is located in Boston?
What was the name of Americas first all female law school?
Wher e is Lesley University College of Art and Desighn located?
What is another name for New Englans school of Art and Design
What is the oldest independant conservatory in the US?
What college plays an important role in making Boston known for Jazz?
What Univesity located outside of Boston still holds a large presence in the city?
What is the nations oldest college?
Where does Harvard plan to expand to?
What was MIT originally known as?
In 1916, MIT moved across the river to what city?
Since the early 1990's, Boston has had less of what type of crime?
Boston police and local groups make an effort toprevent youth from doing what?
The Boston Miracle is the name for the reduction in what crime from 1990 to 1999?
What was the murder rate in Boston in 1990?
How many reported murders were there in 2008?
How many murders were there in 2014?
How many murders were there in Boston in 2015?
Boston is culturally similar to what area?
What is the Boston accent known as?
Who influences Boston's politics and religion?
What are Bostons neologisms more commonly known as?
Food with an emphasis on seafood, salt, and dairy is an exaple of what?
Known for its literary culture, Boston has also been called what?
What century did Ralph Waldo Emerson write in?
What was the name of the bookstore the authors met in?
Where was the Atlantic Monthly first published?
What year was the Boston Public Library founded?
The Boston Symphony Orchestra is a member of what?
What classical music magazine called the Boston Symphony orchestra one of the worlds best orchestras?
What does Boston Symphony orchestra call home?
Where is Symphony Hall located?
Where is the theater District located?
What event occurs on New Year's Eve?
Where is the annual Boston Arts festival?
Where are Italian Summer feasts held?
Whos is honored in the Italian Summer Feasts?
How long are the Harbor-Fest festivities?
What is preserved in the Boston national Historical Park?
What is marked by a line of red bricks in the ground?
Where is the institute of contemporary Art located?
What is one of the oldest libraries in the US?
Where is the New England Aquarium located?
How long has Boston been a religious center?
How many Roman Catholic parishes are in Boston?
Where is the Cathedral of the Holy Cross located?
Where is the headquarters for the Christial Scientists?
What was the city's first Anglican church?
How is the air quality in Boston?
How many days between 2004 and 2013 was the air unhealthy?
Who determined that the air quality was unhealthy on those 4 days?
Allston Green District is an example of what?
How many green housing facilities does the Allston green District contain?
How often is Boston's climate plan updated?
When was the last time the climate plan was modified?
Whos is the late Mayor of Boston?
Who came up with the Renew Boston Whole Building Incentive?
The incentive reduced the cost of what in buildings?
The goal is to get how  many residents to sign up?
How much does the program cost?
Lots of older buildings are supported by what?
The piles begin to rot if exposed to what?
What has been happening to groundwater levels?
Where does the groundwater go instead of into the ground?
How many major North American sports leagues are there?
How many championships has Boston won in these leagues?
How many championships have the sports leagues won since 2001?
Why did the city turn down the chance to host the 2024 Olympic games?
When did Boston withdraw its bid for hosting the Olympic games?
Who plays their games at Fenway park?
Where is Fenway park?
What year was the first game of the first world series played?
What year was fenway Park built?
What was the name of Bostons first baseball team?
What is the TD Gardens former name?
What was the FleetCenter built to replace?
How many teams is TD garden the home to?
How many people can be seated in a basketball game at TD Garden?
How many people can be seated for an ice hockey game at TD Garden?
What league do the new England patriots belong to?
What year were the new England patriots founded in?
What was the original name of the new England patriots?
When dod the Boston patriots change their name?
What stadium do the patriots play in?
How many NCAA Division I members play in Boston?
Which college participates in college football at the highest level?
What is the name of the highest level of college football?
Who participates in the second highest level of college football?
What is the name of the second highest level of college football?
What is one of the most famous sporting events in the city?
When is the head of Charles Regatta held?
How many people were killed in the explosions at the Boston marathon?
What is the oldest public park in the US?
Where is Boston Common located?
What is next to Boston Common?
The Emerald necklace is a string of what?
Who designed the Emerald necklace?
What ranking does the Boston park system have?
Who ranks city park systems?
Parkscore ranks the number of resident within what distance of the park?
How often are elections for mayor held in Boston?
What kind of power does the mayor have?
Who became Mayor in january, 2014?
Who oversees the Boston Public Schools?
What is the capital of Massachusetts?
As the state capital, Boston plays a large role in what?
What is the MWRA?
What is the name of the massachusetts port authority?
Where is the John F kennedy Federal office building located?
What court is located in Boston?
What is the name of the famous bank located in Boston?
Boston is split between how many congressional districts?
What district is the North 3/4 of the city located in?
Who represents the 7th district?
What year was Capuano elected?
What district is the South fourth of Boston located in?
The Boston Globe and the Boston herals are two of Bostons what?
Where is the Christial Science Monitor headquarters?
When did the Christian Science Monitor end daily print newspapers?
How often does The Christian Science monitor publish their magazine?
What is the name of the teen paper that the Boston Globe provides to schools?
Where is the main office of Siglo21?
The former publisher of the Boston phoenix owns what Spanish newspaper?
What is the name of the citys only lesbian owned LGBT magazine?
What year was the Rainbow Times founded?
What locations does the Rainbow Times serve?
Where is the headquarters for the Rainbow Times?
What is the national ranking of Bostons radio market?
What Bostom Am radio station is a sports and talk station?
What is the name of Boston Colleges radio station?
What is the name of Harvards radio station?
WBUR and WGBH are exaples of what type of radio station?
What ranking does the Boston television DMA hold?
What is the sister station to WBZ-TV?
What is the citys PBS station?
MundoFox is an example of what?
Where are most of the television stations transmitters located?
What is the Longwood medical and Academic Area located next to?
Where is Massachusetts General Hospital located?
Where is St. Elizabeths medical center located?
What agency oversees health concerns for city residents?
A lot of Bostond medical facilities are associated with what?
The Longwood medical and Academic Area is affiliated with what medical school?
Tufts- new England medical Center was renamed what?
What neighborhood is the Tufts medical Center located in?
What is the name of the first municipal Hospital in the US?
What Airport is located in East Boston?
Who operates Logan Airport?
What is the name of Bostons main airport?
What airport is North of Logan Airport?
What airport is south of Logan Airport?
How did the streets of downtown Boston grow?
Boston is at the East end of what Interstate?
What year was the O'neill tunnel put in place?
The streets of Back bay grew into a what?
How many people in Boston use public transportation?
Where does Boston rank nationally in terms of public transportation use?
What is the name of Bostons subway system?
The MBTA is also known as the what?
How long is bostons subway system?
Where do Amtrack's Northeast corridor and Chicago lines start?
Where do Amtrack's Northeast corridor and Chicago lines end?
Trains serving new Yourk and Washington D.C also stop where?
What suburbs of Boston is the Route 128 Station located in?
Where does the Downeaster service to maine start?
What is Bostons nickname?
What type of commuters does Have than any other largely populated city?
What percent of Boston's population commutes by walking?
What year did walkscore rank Boston the third most walkable city in the US?
What was the walk score given to Boston?
Bicycling magazine named Boston one of the worst cities in the US for what?
What magazine put Boston on its Future best City For Biking list?
What is the name of the bike share program in Boston?
What year did Hubway launch?
How many rides did Hubway log in its first year?
How many official radio and television networks does the government of Somalia operate?
Are communication services in Somalia mainly located in the public or private sector?
As internet access increases, news media and online portals replace what form of media?
What year was the national postal service of Somalia relaunched?
In 2012, what act was approved to establish a National Communications regulator?
Are communications services in Somalia mostly concentrated in the public or private sector?
Communications in Somalia are mostly concentrated in what sector?
How many official rado iand TV networks does the governemt of Somalia run?
What type of media decreases and internet connectivity increases?
What types of media increases as internet connectivity and access increases?
What year is the postal service in Somalia set to relaunch?
Who funded the new telecommunications firms in Somalia?
China, Korea, and Europe lent what to the creation of the new firms.
What do the new telecommunications firms in Somalia offer that is not available in many other parts of the continent?
Money transfers and wireless internet are two things that customers can now accomplish via what?
When the civil war began, many telecomunications companies were created to provide missing what?
Sprint, ITT, and Telenor are examples of what?
Who provides service to every City, town, and hamlet in Somalia?
aproximately how many main lines are there per 1000 people?
what is another word for availability of telephone lines?
How much does Hormuud Telecom gross per year?
What year did Dahabhiil acquire the majority of Somtal network?
Where is Somtal network located?
Buying Somtal Network allowed Dahabshiil to expand into what type of banking?
STC stands for what?
The STC allows its customers to communicate across how many networks?
Investing in what Industry is a sign that Somalia's economy is continuing to improve?
What sector provides key communication services?
What year was the national Communications act enacted?
What Act clears the way for a National Communications Regulator?
What types of stakeholders consulted on the bill to enact the National Communications Act?
The National Communications Act is expected to create and invironment favorable for what?
Continued infrastructure development results in more efficient what?
What is the name of the Somali postal service?
What is the name of the National postal service of Somalia?
When was the infrastructure of the postal service destroyed?
What airport is home to the Emirates post mail hub?
How many phases made up the reconstruction plan for the Somali Post?
Over what period of time did the reconstruction plan for the Somali Post cover?
How many branch offices will be constructed in the capital in phase one of the reconstruction plan?
How many branch offices will be creted in general bases?
What year did Somali authorities rejoin the Universal Postal Union?
What year did postal service in Somalia resume?
Who is helping the Somali Postal service reach its capacity?
What type of assistance does the postal union provide?
What type of equipment does the postal union provide?
When was Radio Mogadishu established?
What languages di Radio Mogadishu originally broadcast in?
What countrys assistance helped Radio Mogadishu modernize?
What type of services were offered in Somali, Amharic, and Oromo?
Mustaqbal Media Corporation is based where?
In what year was Shabelle Media network awarded the media of the year prize?
How many short wave radio stations broadcast from the capital?
About how many private radio stations does the region of Puntland have?
What is the former name of Radio Gaalkacyo?
Where does RAdio Gaalkacyo operate from?
What province is Galkayo located in?
How many government operated radio stations exist in the Somaliland region?
What TV station is the main public service broadcaster in Somalia?
Where is Somali National Television located?
What year did experimental broadcasts of Somali National Television begin?
When was Somali Nation Television officially re-launched?
Howmany hours a day does SNTV broadcast?
Horn Cable Television and Universal TV are examples of what?
What type of Tv startions replay AL=jazeera and CNN?
Where does SBC TV broadcast from?
What is the commercial capital of Puntland?
Howmany governemnt run channels do Puntland and Somaliland regions have?
Where was The Mogadishu Times published?
What year did free media outlets begin to expand?
Advertisers switched from print ads to what to reach more customers?
Whos is a former editor with The Delka Broadsheet?
What is the IST?
As of December 2012, Somalia did not have systematic what?
What internet standards were also unlear as of December, 2012?
What years was the first ISP established in Somalia?
Somalia was one of the last countries on what continent to get connected tothe internet?
In 2009, what percent of Somalia has internet coverage?
The quickest growing local businesses in Somalia are what types of businesses?
What was the numbe rof Somali internet users in the year 2000?
What was the number of internet users in the year 2011?
Goes the number of internet users in Somalia continue to rise or fall?
What was the number of mobile subscribers in Somalia in 2008?
What is the estimated number of mobile subscribers in Somalia in 2015?
What is the STA?
What sector does the STC oversee?
In 2006, who reported that there were over half a million internet users within the territory?
How many established ISP were within the territory in 2006?
How many cyber cafes were withing the territory in 2006?
As of what year were dial up, wireless , and satellite services available?
What was the landline growth rate of Somalia in 2009?
What was the flat rate per month for unlimited landline calls in Somalia in the year 2009?
What was Somalias largest ISP in 2009?
Who was the only provider of dial up service in Somalias SouthCentral regions in 2009?
Mogadishu and Bosaso are what in Somalia?
What city in Soalia has the largest nuber of subscribers?
Where was the headquarters of the largest wireless internet services?
What is another name for Dalcom?
What wsas the satellite internet growth rate as of 2009?
Dalkom Somalia provided internet over what?
Who were one of the main clients of the local satellite service providers?
As broadband access rose, what happened to the demand for satellite services?
Hormuud Telecom launched what service in 2012?
Who was the 3G service for?
what type of connection was the first of its kind in Somalia?
What type of connection does Tri-Band 3G offer its customers?
what does 3G stand for?
What year did Somalia receive its first fiber optic connection?
in 2013, an agreement between Hormuud Telecom and Liquid Telecom provided residents access to what type of cable provider?
How many miles long is Liquid Telecoms Network?
How will the fiber optic connection impact the price for online access for the average user?
Where is Dalcom Somalia currently building a 1000 square mile data center?
In what century was the term matter defined excluding energy phenomena like light and sound?
What term is used for the substance that composes all observable physical objects?
The mass of an object can come from the motion of its constituents or what other source?
What term is used to describe the type of definition that matter would have if all scientists could agree on its definition?
Prior to the 20th century, the definition of matter included any object that had mass even when it was in what state? 
What kind of particles make up every object in the world that can be touched?
The smaller particles that make up atoms, like protons and neutrons, are what kind of particles?
What subatomic particle has no volume or rest mass?
What  kind of particles are quarks and leptons?
Despite not having size or volume themselves, quarks and leptons contribute to what measure of composite particles in matter?
How many phases of matter are there?
What new phase of matter can be considered with a focus on elementary particles?
What is the theory that matter is made up of discrete building blocks called?
What colleague of Democritus, also a Greek philosopher, helped him propose the particulate theory of matter?
People have been wondering about the nature of matter for the entire history of what branch of science?
What similar term is often used interchangeably with matter, although the two differ slightly in modern physics?
Being a conserved quantity means that the value of mass doesn't ever change as long as it's in what kind of system?
Special relativity says matter can disappear by conversion into what state?
What planet isn't a closed system but sometimes appears to be because of the approximate conservation of matter?
What term does science not have a universally-accepted scientific definition for?
Sometimes scientific terms were historically considered in ways we know now aren't compatible because scientists didn't need to distinguish matter from what other term?
What word do physicists sometimes consider to be defined as particles exhibiting rest mass?
What duality describes the conflicting properties of matter in the fields of chemistry and physics?
Quarks and leptons are sometimes considered matter because they can't travel at what speed?
What does RIBA stand for?
What is the goal of RIBA?
When was RIBA founded?
When was RIBA's founding document expanded?
In what country does RIBA mainly operate?
What was Riba's first name?
In what year was the Institute of British Architects founded?
In what city was the Institute of British Architects located?
In terms of profession, what were people like Philip Hardwick, William Adams Nicholson and Thomas de Grey?
What caused the change of the Institute's name?
What was removed from the Royal Institute's name?
When was the mention of London removed from the Royal Institute's name?
Where is the Royal Institute of British Architects located?
Who opened the structure in which the Royal Institute is currently housed?
When did the Royal Institute receive its charter?
Who was responsible for giving the charter to the Royal Institute?
In what years was the Royal Institute issued supplemental charters?
When were the various supplemental charters consolidated?
What term characterizes the nature of changes to the charter after 1971?
What was the central aim of the Royal Institute?
What document set forth the goals of the Royal Institute?
What was the Royal Institute responsible for doing with regards to the development of knowledge related to architecture?
What sets forth the standards by which the Royal Institute functions?
What guidelines for the Royal Institute are updated most often?
What is necessary to make any changes to either document which governs the operations of the Royal Institute?
What was the first Latin phrase used by the Royal Institute?
Who is responsible for the use of 'usui civium decori urbium'?
What was Donaldson's role within the Royal Institute?
Who reworked the Royal Institute's medal desgin in 1931?
When did Joan Hassall redesign the Royal Institute's medal?
What organization was the Royal Institute instrumental in establishing?
Which items of legislation did the Royal Institute play a large role in promoting?
Where did Lional Bailey Budden teach?
What major compendium did Budden help write an article for?
How many schools formed the Board of Architectural Education?
When did the Royal Institute celebrate its 100th anniversary?
Who was the head of the Registration Committee in 1934?
In 1934, what percentage of architects were members of professional organizations?
Who did Barnes believe was best able to advance the interests of architects?
What specific institution did Barnes indicate could not be a rival of the Royal Institute?
When does the Royal Institute's Guide indicate the first RIBA Board was established?
What school document had to meet the standards of the Board for admittance?
What was necessary for testing in schools applying to the RIBA Board?
What body carried out on-site inspection of member schools of the RIBA Board?
What organization's policies regarding acceptance of professional qualifications prompted thoughts of revamping ARCUK?
When did the name of ARCUK change?
What was the name of the legistlation leading to the change in ARCUK's name?
What was shut down as a result of legislation changing the name of ARCUK?
What was the new name given to ARCUK in the '90s?
What is the function of the Royal Institute's Visiting Boards?
When did the Royal Institute and ARB reach accord on a shared body of criteria?
What does ARB stand for?
What is a key difference between the ARB and Royal Institute?
How many people have membership in the Royal Institute?
What can chartered members of RIBA add to their name to indicate their status?
What type of Royal Institute members are not able to use the organization's acronym after their names?
What is not provided by the Royal Institute anymore?
Fellows of the Royal Institute can use what abbreviation with their names?
What is the Royal Institute of British Architects' street address?
Who designed RIBA's headquarters?
What is one room in RIBA's headquarters that can be visited by the public?
For what purpose can rooms be rented at the Royal Institute's building?
How many satellite offices does the Royal Institute run in the UK?
When was RIBA's first satellite office opened?
In what city was the first RIBA branch office opened?
What territory did RIBA's Cambridge branch office cover?
What is the name of the Royal Institute's business operation?
Where does RIBA's business group have its headquarters office?
How many people work for RIBA Enterprises?
How many of RIBA Enterprises' staff are located at the Newcastle office?
What are three divisions of RIBA Enterprises?
What are two publications produced by RIBA Publishing?
What does NBS stand for?
How many people work for the NBS?
Where is the NBS located?
What is another name for the Royal Institute Library?
When was the RIBA library founded?
How many materials are housed in the RIBA library?
The British Architectural Library is the biggest library of its kind in which continent?
In what institution are some materials from the RIBA collection located?
What was the RIBA Library's first address?
Where did RIBA move its library?
In what year did RIBA move its library?
Which architect's work was preserved throughout World War II by the Royal Institute's Library?
Where is the Royal Institute Library's Reading Room located?
Where are RIBA's Study Rooms located?
What art style was used inthe design of the Reading Room?
In what year did the Royal Institute's Reading Rooms open?
Who is meant to benefit from teaching provided by the RIBA library?
When did the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Institute of British Architects start a formal relationship?
What is the name of the joint venture involving the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Royal Institute of British Architects?
What is the main goal of the V&A + RIBA partnership?
In what space at the V&A is the Architecture Gallery located?
What is found at Room 128a of the Victoria & Albert Museum?
Who designed rooms 128 and 128a at the V&A Museum?
Where was the Royal Institute's Drawing and Archives Collections located originally?
What part of the V&A was the Royal Institute's Drawing and Archives collection moved to?
What does the Royal Institute of British Architects award the Stirling Prize for?
What was the first year in which RIBA's Royal Gold Medal was given?
What is the Royal Gold Medal awarded for?
What is the limit of how much can be spent on projects receiving the Stephen Lawrence Prize?
What is the name of the RIBA awards given to students of architecture?
What are events that a company can sponsor when it is planning a new construction project or redesigning an existing one?
What is provided to guide entrants in an architectural competition?
What kinds of people generally make up the panels which judge architecture competitions?
What is necessary for the integrity of a design competition?
What kind of artistic production can be supported by design competitions?
Aside from the ARB, what other organization offers accreditation services for schools serving architects?
What process does RIBA use in its accreditation system?
What kinds of courses does RIBA conduct accreditation services for apart from the Architects Registration Board?
What is the first step in the Royal Institute's guidelines for education?
What is required by the second stage in the education provisions set out by RIBA?
What does the third part of the Royal Institute's educational process contain?
How long does it take, at the least, for a student to be eligible for the title of Chartered?
What occurs between the second and third parts of the education process prescribed by the Royal Institute?
What did the Royal Institute support in order to keep up with housing in mainland Europe?
When did the Royal Institute promote setting lower limits on the size of new homes in Britain?
Who was the head of the Royal Institute of British Architects in 2007?
To what decade did Pringle unfavorably compare the size of modern British homes?
What country did Pringle cite as having homes with better proportions than those found in the UK?
What is the center of the nervous system in all creatures?
What is the most complex organ in an animal's body?
In people, how many neurons make up the cerebral cortex?
Neurons in the brain interact with each other by fibers called what?
A few animals without spines that do not have a brain are what?
Hormones secreted are driven by what organ in the body?
What type of responsiveness can be used without a brain?
Reflexes only require one of what two structures in a body?
Which part of a computer does the brain most resemble?
Animals with a spine are called what?
Animals without a spine are called what?
The easiest way to learn about brain anatomy is by what?
Brain tissue is naturally soft, but can be stiffened with what liquid?
The two main areas of the brain are what colors?
What instrument can you use to examine the microstructure of the brain?
Grey matter of the brain is what color?
Brains of organisms are made up mostly of what two classes of cells?
Glial cells are also referred to as what?
Which of the two broad classes of cells: neurons and glial cells send signals to other cells?
Axons send signals that are named what?
What is the typical speed that axons send their electrical signals?
Axons send signals to other neurons by junctions known as what?
The neurotansmitter binds to what of a target cell?
An axon can connect to how many other cells?
How many synapses does the human brain supposedly contain?
The fruit fly has a brain that has how many synapses?
A synapse whose purpose is to excite the target cell are called what?
The primary job of the brain is what?
Axons grouped together are known as what?
An axon that can greatly increase speed of signals is wrapped in what?
Myelin is what color in the brain?
Most of the space in the brain is made up of what structures?
Grey matter of the brain consist of lots of what?
Creatures that have a diffuse nerve net are called what?
Bilaterians are animals that have what?
The Cambrian period was how long ago?
A nerve cord with an enlargement is called what?
What type of creature has a ganglion at the back end of the nerve cord as well?
A name for a group of primitive flatworms is what?
Some bilaterians without a brain are what?
Which two groups of invertebrates have complex brains?
Arthropods and cephalopods have brains that come from a pair of what?
The invertebrates with the largest brain are what two animals?
Which brains are easier to work on, vertebrates or invertebrates?
How long ago did the first vertebrate organisms appear?
During which scientific period did vertebrates appear?
Sharks appeared at about how many Mya?
The foremost part of the brain in mammals is known as what?
At how many mya did mammals first appear in time?
Do predators have larger or smaller brains compared to their prey?
In mammals, brain volume and body mass follows a power law with an exponent of what?
Which group of animals have brains 5-10 times larger than the formula predicts?
The forebrain during development is known as what?
The midbrain during development is known as what?
The hindbrain during development is known as what?
Which group of animals does the forebrain grow the largest?
During development, the brain is made up of three swellings at the front of what?
Brain tissue that is living is what color on the outside?
The color of the brain inside is what?
Brains are surrounded by what system of tissues?
Meninges separate what structure from the brain?
The blood-brain barrier is made up of what?
People who study the anatomy of the central nervous system are known as what?
The cerebral hemispheres of the brain are called what?
The thalamus and hypothalamus comprise what region of the brain?
The midbrain region of the brain is known as what?
Clusters of small nuclei comprise what parts of the brain?
The forebrain is everted in what type of fishes?
Which part of the brain has led to many distortions among different species?
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a birds relative to body size?
A mammal's brain is how many times larger than a reptiles relative to body size?
The biggest difference between brains of mammals and other vertebrates is what?
What part of the brain most strongly differentiates mammals from other vertebrates?
The three-layered structure covering the cerebrum in non-mammals is known as what?
Mammals have a pallium that involved into what?
The hippocampus and amygdala are ares inside what structure?
The superior colliculus is related to what sensual control of vertebrates?
The larger part of the cerebellum in mammals is called what?
The Neocerebellum supports what other part of the brain?
Comparing brain sizes among different creatures is used most commonly by what?
What is the average EQ of a person?
Primates have an EQ in what range?
Primates have a visual processing network of how many brain areas?
The visual processing areas occupy how much of the surface of the neocortex or primates?
Planning, motivation, and attention are controlled by what area?
The prefrontal cortex is the largest in what animals?
The precursor of the nervous system is called what in vertebrates?
The neural groove is a hollow cord of cells with what in the center?
The forebrain splits during development into vesicles called what?
The vesicle that contains the cerebral cortex is which one?
The thalamus and hypothalamus are contained in which vesicle?
A growth cone of an axon is made up of a blob of what?
What two structures does a neuron extend when it is in place during development?
The infant brain contains more of what type of cells in the brain than the adult brain?
The olfactory bulb is related to what sense?
What area of the hippocampus plays a role in storing new memories?
Which type of cells in the brain are generated throughout your lifetime?
Neurogenesis is the process of what?
The electrical properties of neurons are controlled by what?
What type of signals do neurons transfer from one another?
Chemicals called neurotransmitters are released at what part of the brain?
What do neurotransmitters attach to?
Neurons that release the same chemicals are following what rule?
GABA is the abbreviation for what?
Which of two neurotransmitters is usually inhibitory?
The neurostransmitter that usually excites targets is called what?
Tranquilizers affect which of the two common neurotransmitters?
Serotonin comes from what part of the brain?
Antidepressants typically affect what chemical of the brain?
Which chemical of the brain is involved with arousal?
Norepinephrine comes from an area of the brain known as what?
An EEG of the brain stands for what?
MEG of the brain is an abbreviation of what?
What type of test is used to tell that a brain is active even during sleep?
What type of brain waves are seen in mammals during sleep?
What type of brain waves are sen when a creature is awake, but inattentive?
What type of cells have a huge role in brain metabolism?
Glial cells control what inside the brain?
Where does the brain usually get most of its energy from inside the body?
The energy used for metabolism of the brain in humans is what percentage?
Other sources than glucose that provide energy to the brain are what?
Most vertebrates usually devote how much metabolism to the brain?
The function of the brain from an evolutionary-biological thought is what?
Computers were invented in what decade in history?
Neuroscience spawned from what field of science in history?
Who wrote the book, The Computer and the Brain?
When was John von Neumann's book, The Computer and the Brain published?
The scientific paper, What the frog's eye tells the frog's brain was released in what year?
Who won a Nobel Prize for the discovery that cells in the visual cortex of monkeys become active when sharp edges move?
What is the project called that is trying to build a realistic, detailed computer model of the human brain?
What type of animal has a sense that adapted into sonar?
What type of animal uses infrared heat to sense?
The group of animals that can detect magnetic fields is what?
The group of creatures that can sense electric fields is what?
Light-receptive neurons are located in what part of the eye?
Vibration-sensitive neurons are found in what part of the ear?
Signals are sent from the thalamus to what part of the brain?
What part of the body is controlled by nuclei in the midbrain?
All the muscles controlled by motor neurons in the body are controlled by what?
Which motor areas of the brain control breathing and swallowing?
At the lowest level of the brain and spinal cord, are what areas?
The red nucleus controls what part(s) of the body?
A strip of tissue found at the edge of the frontal lobe is called what?
The primary motor cortex sends signals to the spinal cord through what?
The brain and spinal cord work together to control what system of the body?
What system in the body controls heart rate?
What system in the body controls salivation?
Most of the processes of the autonomic nervous system are called what?
Which system in the body controls urination?
The SCN of the nervous system is an abbreviation for what?
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is a small part of what part of the brain?
Which part of the arousal system controls the body's biological clock?
The RHT is an abbreviation for what?
THE SCN receives information from the optic nerves through what?
A group of neuron-clusters scattered in the core of the lower brain is called what?
Reticular neurons transfer signals to what part of the brain?
Damage to the reticular formation can cause what?
The SCN transfers signals to a set of areas that implement what?
There are two types of sleep called what?
What type of sleep involves dreaming?
The three types of brain activity that can be measured are what?
Slow wave sleep is also known as what?
During what stage of sleep do serotonin and norepinephrine levels drop?
Homeostasis is defined as what?
Homeostasis is Greek for what phrase?
The milieu interieur term was used by what physiologist?
Homeostasis is like what household tool?
The hypothalamus is located at the base of what?
In vertebrates, the most important part of the brain is what?
A collection of small nuclei at the base of the forebrain is called what?
The gland directly underneath the hypothalamus is which gland?
The pituitary gland sends hormones through what in the body?
A set of interconnected areas at the base of the forebrain is called what?
The basal ganglia is thought to be the central location at which what are made?
Which neurotransmitter plays a large role in drug abuse?
Which of the two systems, reward or punishment is better understood?
In what year did Tim Bliss and Terje Lomo publish a paper about long-term potentiation?
BDNF is an abbreviation for what term?
Learning and memory expressed as changes in the synaptic connections was first theorized by whom?
What field of science studies the brain and the central nervous system?
What scientific field tries to understand the mind and behavior?
What field of science strives to diagnose and treat diseases of the nervous system?
Psychiatry is the branch of science that does what?
Cognitive science seeks to join what two branches of science with other fields?
The oldest known method of studying the brain is what?
What do neuroanatomists study?
What type of study uses medical imaging techniques to correlate changes in brain structure?
Until what century was brain studying mostly anatomical?
What do neurophysiologists study?
The most common tools that neurophysiologists use are what?
What type of receptors does the brain lack?
Electrodes are often glued to what like in EEG studies?
The brain is surrounded by what type of fluid?
The brain is separated from the bloodstream by what feature?
The two main structures that protect the brain are what?
What type of disease if often studied to understand damage to the brain?
What type of animal is most commonly used to study brain damage?
Computational neuroscience is concerned with what two studies?
What is the most common test subjects for studying of the brain?
Where was the oldest brain that was found?
How old was the oldest brain discovered thought to be?
The oldest known brain discovered was found in how old of a person?
The oldest brain found in a cave was from what gender of human?
The seal of the soul was debated to lie in what two organs of the body?
Aristotle thought the soul lied in what organ?
Who invented the atomic theory of matter?
The "father of medicine" is a name given to whom in history?
What philosopher in history argued for a three-part soul?
The physician Galen was from which country in history?
What period in history was anatomical  studies of nerves greatly increased?
Who coined the term pneumata psychikon?
Penumata psychikon is usually translated as what?
Who found out that a shock of electricity to an exposed nerve of a dead frog caused contractions?
The tool that was invented to stain only a small fractions of neurons was called what?
What nationality was santiago Ramon y Cajal?
Work in the first half the 20th century in electrical properties of nerve cells were by what two main scientists?
Which decade in history was officially called the "Decade of the Brain"?
Multielectrode recording allows what?
Genetic engineering allows what?
What does genomics allow the study of?
During what century was multielectrode recording invented?
Genetic engineering was first discovered in what century?
What is phonology a branch of?
What kind of systems are the traditional focus of phonology? 
The study of sign language is a part of what?
What part of a language can phonology as a word also refer to?
What is another term for phonological system?
Aside from syntax and the phonological system, what else comprises a language?
What sort of language system is phonology?
What branch of linguistics is phonology distinguished from?
What kind of linguistics is phonetics considered to be a part of?
Phonology is generally considered a part of the theoretical side of what discipline?
When was the phonome's modern concept developed?
What subfield of modern phonology other than phsycholinguistics crosses over with phonetics? 
What language does phonology as a word come from?
What Greek word is -logy derived from?
Who in 1939 defined phonology?
A distinction was drawn between language and what?
When did Lass write about phonology?
What type of grammar was phonology first a part of?
What is the name of ancient Sanskrit grammar?
Who first composed the Ashtadhyayi?
During what time period did Panini do his work?
What other text was related to the Ashtadhyayi?
When was the phoneme as a concept introduced?
Who was Jan Baudouin de Courtenay's student?
What nationality was de Courtenay?
What was de Courtenay's profession?
Who was influenced by  Jan Baudouin de Courtenay?
What was Nikolai Trubetzkoy's publication?
When was Principles of Phonology published?
What is Trubetzkoy considered to have founded?
What school was Trubetzkoy a member of?
What was Trubetzkoy's title?
When was The Sound Pattern of English published?
Other than Chomsky who else published The Sound Pattern of English?
Besides the syllable what was downplayed as a result of SPE's influence on phonological theory?
What other discipline was combined with phonology by the generativists?
Whose publications started the theory of Natural phonology?
According to Stampe what is phonology based on?
Aside from being active what other condition can the universal phonological processes exist in?
Who is the number two natural phonologist?  
Who was the founder of natural morphology?
Who founded autosegmental phonology?
When did John Goldsmith share his work?
What did Autosegmental phonology morph into?
When was Government phonology first seen?
What is responsible for differences in surface realizations according to Government phonology?
Jonathan Kaye is an important person in what form of phonology?
When did Prince and Smolensky develop their theory?
Where was optimality theory created?
Aside from Alan Prince who brought optimality theory to morphology?
Who were prominent critics of optimality theory?
What followed government phonology?
Where is government phonology popular?
What theory is seen more in the US?
What is Evolutionary Phonology an integrated approach to?
What is combined to sound patterns by Evolutionary Phonology?
When did Evolutionary Phonology come into being?
What sort of approach did Evolutionary Phonology take?
What are the units called that traditional phonology studies?
What is another word for variations?
What is the opposite of aspirated?
What type of language study involves trying to deduce underlying phonomes?
Aside from finding out what underlying phonemes are there what does the phonological study of a language try to find out about the language?
What kind of speaker data does studying a language phonologically involve examining? 
What kind of linguistics describes how factors of languages change in history?
With the passage of time what particular things phonemic in a language are known to change?
In the past sounds that now belong to separate phonemes were allophones of what kind of phoneme in English?
How do speech perception and articulation findings and insights affect previous and more traditional ideas?
How does interchanging allophones of the same pheneme render words?
What does splicing words affect?
What are assigned to phonemes by different linguists?
What part of a human does language processing?
The phonetical similarity of what thing causes disagreements between linguists?
When did theoretical linguists turn away traditional phoneme concepts?
On what level do theoretical linguists consider basic units?
What is a name for the basic morpheme unit?
What is the act of analyzing morphophones called?
What kind of linguists are leaving the old methods behind?
What do phonemes differentiate? 
Aside from phonemes what is studied by phonology?
The study of syllable structure is part of what discipline?
Under what topic is suprasegmentals studied?
Aside from bleeding what is an order of rules that define how pronunciation of a sound changes?
Phonotactics, phonological alternation and prosody are topics contained in what discipline?
Stress and intonation are studied under what topic?
Instead of being language-specific what kind of tools are the principles of phonological analysis designed to be?
What other types of language have the phonological analysis principles been applied to?
What are the principles of phonological analysis able to be applied separately from?
In sign languages what are not represented as instances of speech sounds?
In general, what does immunology study?
Immunology studies the functioning of the immune system in which two states of being?
Name three types of immunological disorders?
Immunology studies the immune system in which three stages of existence?
What disciplines in medicine have particularly strong immunology applications?
The term immunology is derived from a Latin word that means what?
What are the major organs of the immune system?
Who originally discovered these parts of the immune system?
How do physicians study a patient's immune system organs in emergency situations?
Which portions of the immune system can be safely removed in these emergency cases?
The structure of immune system components can be described as what?
Are immune tissues typically fixed with specific organs usually?
What is one way the cellular structures of the immune system are housed in the body?
What is another way these tissues are housed within the body?
Which two fields of study are associated with immunology?
Immunology studies how which three areas impact one another?
When was the first written mention of immunity as it pertains to the body?
Which Greek historian made that notation?
When did immunology start to become codified as a scientific theory?
What is the basic, primitive part of the immune system known as?
Vertebrates also have what type of immune system component?
What is one type of adaptive immune system component?
Name the other type of adaptive immune system component?
The total immune system is generally composed of what types of structures?
Humoral immunology involves the interaction of what two elements?
What are antibodies comprised of?
What cells produce antibodies?
The term "antigen" is rooted in what two words?
Immunology is the study of what type of responses to antibodies and antigens?
In the field of immunology, what aspect is becoming more specialized?
What new areas are immunologists studying with more frequency?
The latest research into newer aspects of immunology is focused on what three elements of the body?
These three elements of the body are of new interest for what reason?
The study of diseases caused by immune system disorders is called?
What are three problems of the immune system studied by clinical immunology?
Where can these three elements occur in the immune system?
What else does clinical immunology concern itself with?
Why does clinical immunology extend to those areas?
What is a type of immune system disorder?
What are some examples of hypersensitivities?
What characterizes a hypersensitivity?
What is the most famous immune system disease?
What kind of disease is AIDS?
Which types of cells are suppressed by AIDS?
What virus specifically suppresses those cells?
What are the four factors that determine how the body reacts to an antigen?
Newborns are particularly susceptible to infections caused by?
What activity is also greatly reduced in newborn infants?
Why are newborns described as being physiologically immunodeficient?
Antigen cells in newborns are also struggle to do this?
In babies, what is another element impacting immune response?
Newborns can acquire antibodies from the mother through what means?
For how long do these antibodies have an effect on infants?
At 6 to 9 months, an infant's immune system begins to respond to which proteins?
The difference in responses in infant immune systems is the cause of what?
What is the primary trigger for immunological changes in teens?
What specific hormone catalyzes these changes in females?
Which specific hormone precipitates the change in immunology in males?
Adolescent immunological changes can also result in what?
Evidence suggests that receptors on B cells may do what?
The routine practice of immunology can best be characterized as?
What are two opposing theories of early 20th century immunology?
Cellular immunology expressed the theory that what cells caused immune responses?
Humoral immunology theorized that the origin of the immune system lay in what?
Rather than cells, in humoral immunology where did the molecules that cause immune response reside?
What medical scientist first proposed the clonal selection theory of immunology?
What triggers an immune response according to CST?
In CST, what triggers a destructive immune response?
What property of T cells caused modification of CST?
When was clonal selection theory first proposed?
What discipline can undergraduate students interested in general health study?
Immunology is a branch of what larger field of study?
The goal of an immunologist is to study what beings?
The biggest part of an immunologist's job is what?
What two conditions apply to good immunological study?
Most graduate schools specializing in immunology follow what organization's parameters?
What is the name of the immunology school at Mount Sinai?
AAI immunology courses include what two components?
What does the introductory AAI immunology course do?
The Langone Medical Center is part of what college?
Part 1 of the AAI introductory immunology course is meant to be what?
Part 2 of the AAI introductory immunology course revolves around what?
What pre-requisite should enrollees in the advanced immunology course have?
How long does it typically take to earn a Master's degree?
What program requires an additional two years of study?
The terms uppercase and lowercase originated from the common layout which type of drawers?
Besides being a single word or two separate words, how can the words uppercase and lowercase be expressed?
In relation to the shelf the small letters were located, where were the capital letters?
Which characteristic of capital letters made it easy to remember.
What is the basis of capitalization standards for the sentence-style capitalization?
What is the popular capitalization structure and standard used by many British publishers and U.S. newspapers?
What is an alternative name for sentence-style capitalization?
Which popular global publisher utilizes sentence case for titles and headers?
Besides headlines, what is sentence-style capitalization often applied to?
Which century did the lower-case script for the Greek Alphabet originate?
Which century did the Greek alphabet acquire its quadrilinear form?
Overtime which type of letter forms were mixed increasingly into the Greek language script?
Which year is the earliest dated Greek lower-case text?
In which literature is the earliest dated Greek lower-case text?
In orthography and typography, what is the distinction between the letters that are in larger upper case and lower upper case
Minuscule is a term uses to describe which case of letter?
Capital letters refer to which case of letter?
Letter case is used to distinction betweem lowercase and uppercase letter in which common representation of certain languages?
Capitalization in English is universally standardized for which type of writing?
In English the first letter of a sentence is which type of letter?
What is capitalization commonly use to indicate in poetry independent of any grammatical feature?
How is the first letter of a first-person pronoun handled mid sentence in English?
The interjection "O" has been replaced by which more common and preferred word in English?
Originally alphabets were written entirely in which type of letter?
Rounder and simpler forms of letters came from writing quickly with which instrument?
Who developed the Carolingian minuscule script for handwriting?
Carolingian minuscule script quickly spread across which continent?
What is a common advantage of miniscule over majuscule handwriting?
What is often prescribed by the grammar of a language or by conventions of a particular discipline?
Which kind of purpose is uppercase reserved for in orthography?
Which is the most common variant of case in text?
Engineering design drawings typically utiilze which case of letter in labeling?
Why are uppercase letters preferred often times when space is restricted?
Who do majuscules have which distinguish themselves from minuscules?
In Time New Roman the letter "b" would be consider which type of letter based on whether it is above or below average height?
Descending letters tend to have a part which falls where relative to the average height of a letter?
Besides the number 6, which number makes of the ascender set in some traditional or classical fonts?
What do most Western languages use in their written form to add clarity?
What are writing systems which make no distinction between majuscales and minuscules often referred to as?
Which alphabet is a special case because it transitioned from bicameral to unicameral?
What are scripts that utilized two seperate cases called?
Papyri from Herculaneum dating before 79 AD have been to to be written in which hand writing?
Whicy papyrologist theorized lowercase letter actually developed from the fifth century uncials?
Which continents languages with few exceptions generally did not utilize case distinction until about the year 1300?
What was the initial difference between majuscule and minuscule letters? 
Which type of document was general unicameral because the writer used one type of writing but not another?
What is capitalization of significant words applied to in the United States besides titles?
Capitalization of significant words refers to which family of typographic conventions?
Which book of literature standards suggests capitalizing the first word and all nouns, pronouns, adjectives, verbs, and adverbs?
The use of bold fonts and capilization in titles falls under which unusual grammatical distinction?
Attempts to unify Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic would create which sort of problems?
What among many common letters is shared between Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic?
What would be problematic for a multilingual character set or font to provide?
What distinguishes Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic from one another?
Although there are challenges a unified European alphabet is feasible even in the absence of which common language rule?
Self-image, self-esteem, and individuality relate to what?
What aspect or type of identity does Weinreich single out?
What psychological concept does Weinreich state as between the past and future?
A person's identity is defined as the totality of what?
The central task for psychologists, sociologists, and anthropologists is to describe what topics?
Who developed the ISA?
ISA stands for what?
Identity diffusion, foreclosure, and crisis are categories of what?
Those with high levels of identity diffusion are classified as what?
Those with low levels of identity diffusion are classified as what?
An adolescent going through a family break up turning into an adult in a stable marriage is given as an example of change in what?
What level of identity diffusion is interpreted as the norm?
What group has shifted the focus of research in identity?
What does a researcher have to identify to carry out empirical research?
What researcher advocated for focus on the boundaries of ethnic groups rather than the cultural aspects of ethnic groups?
If identity is a virtual site, what do boundaries supply to the virtual site?
Boundaries are frequently used by researchers to help define what?
What are gender identity, ethnic identity, and occupational identity aspects of?
How one construes oneself now and in the future differs considerably because of what 2 things?
The young child, the adolescent, the young adult and the older adult are phases of what?
The salient experiential markers one uses to define one's past self differ based on the age that one was at what?
What is distinct from the self?
What can the literature of self-psychology offer insight into?
What have theorists shown interest in relating to the self-concept?
The I and the Me are two areas of interest in what?
Self-psychology is compelled to investigate how personal self relates to what?
What two factors are focused on when explaining an individual's actions within a group?
What are individual cognition and collective behavior are levels of?
What term have Anthropologists employed to refer to the Eriksonian idea of selfhood?
Modern concerns with ethnicity and social movements in the 1970's led what group to be more interested in identity?
Until recently, what approach was used to refer to qualities of sameness in relation to a person's connection to others?
What are the two types of group boundaries?
A marker that imposes restriction on the behavior of others is what kind of boundary?
A marker that people are ready and willing to associate with is what kind of boundary?
What boundary is given as an example that can be inclusive or exclusive?
What identity status paradigm emerged due to the work of James Marcia?
The Neo-Eriksonian identity status paradigm focuses on what twin concepts?
In the Neo-Eriksonian identity status paradigm, exploration and commitments determine what in large part?
What do many people gain from their identity groups?
People favoring those in their group over outsiders, is an example of what?
Belonging and discrimination are both important to researchers working in what tradition?
Distinction between in and out groups has been shown to affect people's evaluations of others in work related to what?
What approach takes the sense of self and belonging as a fixed thing?
The view that identity is based on a political choice of characteristics is rooted in what theory?
Primordialist and social constructionist views need to be understood in what contexts?
Various research traditions are using what lens to examine phenomena?
What stigma do correctional officers have to deal with?
The implications of identity and identity construction are discussed in what settings?
What are people in stigmatized jobs forced to create?
What are the two examples give for justifications and values for occupational choices?
What is it called when someone aspires to the characteristics of significant others?
What is it called when someone wants to dissociate from the characteristics of significant others?
Dissociating from the characteristics of significant others is a process of what?
The formation of identity occurs through identifications with whom?
What may a person display in terms of both exploration and commitments?
What is the permutation when a person lacks exploration and commitment?
What is the permutation when a person has not chosen goals in the past but is willing to in the future?
What is the permutation when a person is ready to make commitments but unable to commit?
What is the permutation when a person commits to identity choices?
Many scholars confuse identity as a category of practice and what other category?
What do many scholars demonstrate a tendency towards?
The idea that identity is made of components that are identified by individuals is what idea? 
Some scholars try to introduce new concepts to capture the fluid qualities of what?
What is it impossible to do with identity?
What is identified as determining how a person views him or herself to a significant degree?
What are racial, religious, ethnic, and occupational aspects aspects of?
Identity refers to the capacity for self-reflection and awareness in what scientific study?
Who was one of the earliest psychologists to take an explicit interest in identity?
What distinction is sometimes referred to as the self?
The personal idiosyncrasies that separate individuals are called what?
What are the 3 names for the collection of a person's social roles?
In what tradition is Erikson's work to track identity formation throughout a lifetime?
Whose definition of identity closely follows Erikson's?
One person's perception of another's perception is an example of what concept?
The person, aspects of self, and personal characteristics displayed to others are components of what?
Who formulated the classifications of strategic manipulator, pastiche personality and the relational self?
In what classification is a person who regards all experiences are role play and becomes alienated from his or her social self?
In what classification is a person who gives up the chance for a true self and adopts social perceptions of him or herself?
In what classification is a person who gives up their exclusive sense of self and defines him or herself only in terms of social engagement?
The strategic manipulator, pastiche personality, and relational self are linked to the rise of what culture?
What concept helps map and define people's experiences of self in society?
What is a volatile, flexible, and abstract thing?
Language, dress, behavior, and choice of space are affected by recognition by what group?
What do markers help create?
Markers can be used to exert what on other people?
In what decade was digital telephony transmission made possible?
What is the minimum bit rate for compressed video and audio transmission?
What is an example of an early form of digital video and audio communication?
In what form did the first dedicated videoconferencing system appear as?
What company offered the first commercial videoconferencing system?
What controls the conferencing while its active on the signaling plane?
What is one example of what the signaling plane controls in a videoconferencing system?
Where does the videoconferencing system manage conferencing creation?
On what plane does the MC operate?
What generates output streams from each endpoint?
What technology has become more widely available and affordable?
What is an example of a personal videoconferencing system tool?
What has made videoconferencing accessible to many?
Videoconferencing freeware is widely available in what programs?
Videophone calls are different from videoconferencing in what way?
What is an example of a videophone call program?
What term is more used today to refer to calls between two units?
What are videoconferencing calls now more commonly known as?
What is another name for videophone calls?
In what decade did developers extend the capabilities of videoconferencing to more devices?
What allows people in remote locations the ability to video-conference with colleagues far away?
What is one example of an application that videoconferencing manufacturers have begun to offer?
What type of applications have videoconferencing manufacturers begun to offer?
What is an example of a place that videoconferencing can be used today?
What can videoconferencing offer students?
Who can benefit from two-way communication forums?
What is a major barrier to videoconferencing between some communities?
What is one example of how students can benefit from videoconferencing?
What is one experience that students using videoconferencing can achieve?
What company introduced the first device to help deaf people communicate through telecommunications?
What was the name of AT&T's videophone device?
In what year was AT&T's "Picturephone" device introduced?
Where was AT&T's "Picturephone" device unveiled?
In what decade were more efficient ways of using sign language via video-telephony developed?
In what industry has videoconferencing become useful?
On what film was videoconferencing widely used?
What year was the movie Frozen released?
In what city were the songwriting team of Frozen located?
How many months did the songwriters work on the movie via videoconferencing?
What is a video-conference also known as?
What does a video-conference use that allows communication in live situations?
What is a multi-point control unit?
How does video-conferencing allow multiple parties to communicate with each other?
How many locations can one use videoconferencing for?
What is one area where teleconferencing could not be used?
Who developed the first systems to transmit slow-scan video?
When was the first slow-scan video systems researched?
What was the bit rate of AT&T's Picturephone?
What was the bandwidth of AT&T's Picturephone?
What year did one the first community service usages of videoconferencing take place?
What company helped in the creation of community service videoconferencing?
What is the videoconferencing product that both IBM and PictureTel worked on?
What does DIANE in Project DIANE stand for?
How many years did it take for Project DIANE to grow?
What enables videoconferencing to connect three or more remote points?
What is one type of MCU bridge?
In what way can an MCU be characterized?
What feature enables an MCU to allow for multiple parties to be seen on screen at the same time?
Where can an MCU be embedded?
In what one way can videoconferencing help a person?
What technology can be used along with videoconferencing?
What is another use of VoIP?
What is telecommuting?
What is the percentage of people who use videoconferencing a majority of the time?
In what decade was Internet video-conferencing made possible?
In what device was videoconferencing finally able to be used in?
In what year was CU-SeeMe, a desktop-based videoconferencing tool, developed?
In what year did the first public video-conference take place?
What South African city participated in the first public video-conference?
What is the software that performs audio and/or video compression?
How high can compression rates go?
What is one digital network through which a digital stream can be transmitted?
What does POTS stand for?
What do POTS do?
What is a common use of conferencing technology?
What profession utilizes videoconferencing technology to conduct online sessions?
What is one way that videocalling can be used?
What is a common use of conferencing technology?
What is one way that videoconferencing is useful?
What areas benefit especially from videoconferencing? 
In what US state did a rural area use videoconferencing to help reduce the number of transfers of sick infants to hospitals? 
How far away was the hospital from this rural area?
How much money did videoconferencing help this rural area save?
In what European country has VRS services become well developed?
What is one of the reasons why VRS services are not in most European countries?
What European country is a leader in providing VRS services to its citizens?
What country is a world leader in providing VRS services?
What year was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?
Who produced the first high definition video conferencing system?
Where was the first HD video conferencing system displayed?
What company introduced the first HD video conferencing system to the general market?
What was the resolution of the first HD video conferencing system?
What do systems with no MCU use in order to perform multipoint conferencing?
What is one advantage of using an H.323 technique?
What is one disadvantage of using the H.323 technique?
What is the H.323 technique also known as?
Why is the video and audio of the H.323 technique higher quality?
Who has the world's largest administrative judicial system?
What US Department oversees the World's largest administrative judicial system?
In what year did the SSA see a 55% increase in videoconferenced hearings?
When did the SSA open its largest videoconferencing-only center?
Where is the SSA's fifth videoconferencing only center located?
Where was the band Blue Cheer from?
What classic song did Blue Cheer cover?
What was the hit off Steppenwolf's self-titled debut lp?
What movie featured that Steppenwolf single?
The lyrics to "Born To Be Wild" contain the first reference to what hard rock style?
The band Rush is what nationality?
What are the first three Rush albums?
What nationality was Thin Lizzy?
What was Thin Lizzy's hit single?
The Scorpions hailed from what country?
What is the title of Bon Jovi's third lp?
How many copies did this record sell?
What was the band Europe's international hit?
What was Van Halen's 1986 album called?
Who was the new lead singer for Van Halen on 5150?
What Aerosmith ballad debuted at number one on the charts?
What was the title of AC/DC's 1995 double lp?
Bon Jovi's 1995 album was called what?
What commercially successful sub-genre emerged from the grunge movement?
When did Aerosmith's album Get A Grip come out?
What are two examples of glam metal bands?
What two genres cut into hard rock's popularity at the end of the 1980s and early 1990s?
What were some hard rock bands of the 1970s?
What style did some hard rock bands embrace in the 1980s?
What genre laid the roots for hard rock?
Who recorded "Rumble"?
When was "Rumble" released?
What were two of Dick Dale's better known songs?
What city's blues style produced hard rock precursors in electric blues?
What was the landmark hard rock album recorded by the Rolling Stones in 1972?
Which Led Zeppelin album featured the hit "Stairway to Heaven"?
What two hard rock songs are featured on Deep Purple's Machine Head album?
Who was Deep Purple's guitarist?
Who was the drummer for The Who?
Who was the original lead singer of AC/DC who died?
Who was the Led Zeppelin drummer who passed away?
What singer replaced Ozzy Osbourne in Black Sabbath?
What was Ozzy Osbourne's first solo album?
What are some thrash metal bands?
Guns N Roses released both Use Your Illusion albums in what year?
What band's debut was titled Shake Your Money Maker?
What was the title of Def Leppard's 1992 album?
Adrenalize followed what 1987 Def Leppard record?
Adrenalize topped US album charts for how long?
When did the band The Darkness break up?
The Sword, High on Fire, Witchcraft and Wolfmother are all examples of what hard rock sub-genre?
What is the title of Airbourne's debut lp?
Glam metal band Steel Panther is from what city?
What are some Swedish sleaze metal revivalist bands?
Who were three Chicago blues players who influenced hard rock?
Who recorded "You Really Got Me"?
"Shapes of Things" was a 1966 single by what band?
What garage rock classic was recorded by The Kingsmen?
When did the Rolling Stones release "(I Can't Get No" Satisfaction"?
When did Free break up?
What band did Free lead singer Paul Rodgers help form?
Bad Company's self titled debut album was released in what year?
What nationality was the band Nazareth?
What was Queen's massive 1975 hit single called?
What sub-genre of hard rock does Def Leppard belong to?
What was Def Leppard's second album called?
What were the three Top 40 singles from Def Leppard's Pyromania album?
What band had the first glam metal album to hit number one on the Billboard charts?
When did Motley Crue's album Shout At The Devil come out?
What was the title of Nirvana's 1991 album?
What was the hard rock style that emerged in the early 1990s?
What are some grunge bands with a strong 1970s influence?
What 1990s hard rock band had a big stadium rock sound?
What element made Oasis unique among 1990s Britpop bands?
When did the Foo Fighters album In Your Honor come out?
Three Days Grace is from what country?
The band Jet is from what country?
What supergroup featured members of Foo Fighters, Queens of the Stone Age and Led Zeppelin?
What was the title of Buckcherry's 2007 hit single?
What instrument is usually at the center of a hard rock sound?
Rhythm guitar in hard rock usually plays what?
In hard rock, an electric guitar can also be used for what?
What carries the backbeat in hard rock drumming?
What instrument works in tandem with the drums to provide hard rock rhythms?
Who was the guitarist for the band Cream?
Who was the guitarist in the Kinks?
Who played guitar in The Who?
When did The White Album come out?
Keith Richards is the guitarist of what band?
Who recorded the album School's Out?
Tres Hombres is the name of an album by what band?
Who was the lead singer of Montrose?
Kiss' double live album Alive! came out in what year?
Who had a hit single with "(Don't Fear) The Reaper"?
What was the title of Deep Purple's 1980s reunion album?
What album was Van Halen's commercial high point?
In what year did ZZ Top release Eliminator?
What band recorded "Keep On Loving You"?
The hit single "Amanda" was recorded by what band?
What was Van Halen's last album with Sammy Hagar?
Who was the Guns N Roses drummer who was fired by the band?
What former member of Extreme briefly served as the lead singer for Van Halen?
Who was the only original member left in Guns N Roses?
Slash left Guns N Roses in what year?
By the late 60s, what term was synonymous with hard rock?
What heavy metal group introduced darker themes to the music?
What genre was an influence on extreme metal in the 1980s?
Hard rock is differentiated from heavy metal by containing more of an influence of what genre?
In heavy metal, riffs typically form what element of a song?
Led Zeppelin's first two albums both came out in what year?
What was the title of Deep Purple's hard rock 1970 album?
Black Sabbath's lyrics contained references to what cultural touchstones?
What is the title of Black Sabbath's 1970 album?
What is one band directly influenced by Black Sabbath?
What two genres made inroads on hard rock in the 1970s?
What punk band's songs rarely exceeded two minutes in length?
What were three midwestern hard rock bands?
What city was Van Halen originally from?
Which Van Halen instrumental showcased the guitar mastery of Eddie Van Halen?
How many copies did Whitesnake's 1987 self title album sell?
What was the title of Aerosmith's 1987 comeback album?
Def Leppard's album Hysteria churned out how many hit singles?
What Guns N Roses album was the second best selling debut of all time?
What Guns N Roses song became a number one single?
What hard rock supergroup contained members of Soundgarden and Rage Against the Machine?
What was the title of Bon Jovi's 2000 hit single?
What band released an album called Stiff Upper Lip in 2000?
Who was the lead singer of Stone Temple Pilots?
What was Guns N Roses long delayed 2008 album called?
What hindered the competetive ability of Apple when it was introduced?
Where did Macintosh initially find success in the market?
Which platform, when improved in the 1990's, took market share from Macintosh?
What type of advantage did Intel's Pentium over Macintosh systems in the 1990's?
Who became the top PC manufacturer in 1994, leaving Apple in 3rd place?
How much RAM did the first Maciuntosh board have?
Whose idea was it to run Apple Lisa's graphical programs on the Macintosh?
What did Tribble first incorporate into the Mac?
Which design feature did Smith eventually use to make production of a newly designed board more cost-efficient?
What feature was missing from the final Mac design produced by Smith?
How much did Apple spend to advertise in a special post-election issue of Newsweek?
What was the name of the big promotion Apple ran in the special edition of Newsweek?
What did Apple allow potential buyers to take home and try for 24 hours?
How were many computers returned during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion that made them unsellable?
Who was the CEO of Apple during the Test Drive a Macintosh promotion?
What was the longest-lived Macintosh in Apple's history while it was in production?
How long did the Mac Plus remain in production, unchanged?
In 1986, what did Apple introduce to allow developers to create software for Macintosh on Macintosh?
What did Apple's HyerCard and MultiFinder add to the Macintosh?
After their unveiling in 1987, what did Apple begin bundling with every Macintosh?
What Macintosh first included an on-board MMU?
What was the first Mac to be "32-bit clean"?
What was the starting price of the Macintosh llfx when it was unveiled?
How many Apple II CPUS's did the new Macintosh llfx include?
How fast was the processor on the new Macintosh llfx?
Which Mac is known for improving the handling of color graphics?
Who did Apple pay expensive consulting fees to before doing in-house work?
What was established for bringing Apple's design work in-house?
Who was responsible for crafting a new look for all Apple products?
How did the Mac System 7 improve multitasking?
Who returned to Apple in 1997?
What did Steve Jobs order the OS version 7.7 to be branded as?
What did the branding of the Mac OS 8 effectively end?
What effect did Mac's decision to brand the Mac OS8 have on companies such as Motorola?
How much money did Umax lose when it exited the low-end Mac clone market?
What did dated architecture on the Mac OS line make necessary?
What programming language was the Mac OS initially developed in?
What language replaced Pascal for System 7?
What was the fuly overhauled successor to Mac OS 9?
Upon release, what interface allowed Mac users to sample Apple's new operating system and provide feedback for the actual release?
What is the only mainstream computer platform to successfully transition to a new CPU architecture?
What is the standard amount of RAM included with almost all current Mac models?
Which MacBook Pro port can transfer data at speeds up to 10 gigabits per second?
When was the iMac G5 released?
Which interface did Apple introduce that was capable of being operated by an Apple Remote or keyboard for accessing media stored on the computer?
What is the standard amount of RAM shipped with most Mac models?
What processors are used by the current Mac product family?
How many data transfer ports are included in most current Macs?
According to Apple, how fast can the Thunderbolt port transfer data?
Which technique was once used to boot an alternate operating system than Mac OS?
What was introduced that made using Mac OS alternative operating systems easier?
What were Open Firmware-based PCI Macs used as a convenience because of?
Where does Mac hardware boot directly to in all Intel-based Macs?
Where does Mac harware boot directly to in most PowerPC-based Macs?
Who was brought in to shape the marketing of Macintosh in 1982?
What role did Andy Cunningham and Jane Anderson have in the Macintosh launch plan?
Who introduced the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept to Apple?
Which company first used the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept?
What did the "multiple exclusive" event marketing concept create around a product?
Who initiated a successful price war among PC manufacturers in 1994?
Who did Compaq overtake in the price war of 1994?
What happened to Apple's market share with the release of Windows 95?
What unified Microsoft's MS-DOS and Windows products?
What significantly enhanced the multimedia capability of IBM PC compatible computers?
What percent of the desktop share in the U.S. did Apple have in 2003?
Who are IDC and Gartner?
What was Apple's market share in the U.S. by 2006?
What percentage of unit sale increase did Apple see from 2005 to 2006?
What was the estimated installed base of Mac computers in 2009?
When was the Macintosh SE released at the same time as?
What was the first compact Mac with a 20 MB internal hard drive and an expansion slot?
What was the starting price of the Macintosh SE?
What did the location of the SE's expansion slot potentially expose an upgrader to?
Who did Apple suggest users go to for performing updates on their SE's?
What is partially credited for the significant boost in sales of Macs in recent years?
What allows users to easily sync data between an iPhone and a Mac?
What consumer trend has hurt many personal computer manufacturers?
Which smartphone has hurt personal computer manufacterers the most?
What are the top two computing devices consumers are choosing?
What did Apple introduce in 1990 to combat competition from smartphones?
What was the less expensive version of the Macintosh SE that was offered until 2001?
Which Macintosh had a distinctive "pizza box" case?
How many expansion slots did the Macintosh IIsi have?
How did Apple's profit margin on the lower cost Mac's compare to the profit margin onearlier models?
When did Apple begin to favor aluminum in their design?
Which Mac used aluminum in it's construction?
Which material did Apple add with the 2008 unibody MacBrook Pro?
Are aluminum and glass considered to be environmentally friendly or environmentally harmful?
What has Chief Designer Jonathan Ive been able to eliminate in Mac notebooks?
Who began the Macintosh project in 1979?
What was Jef Raskin's profession?
What did Jef Raskin envision for a computer to be for an average consumer?
Why was the spelling of McIntosh changed to Macintosh?
What did McIntosh Laboratory, Inc. manufacture?
Who discussed rumors of a mysterious "MacIntosh" project in 1983?
Where was the Macintosh 128K manufactured?
How much did the television commercial "1984" cost?
What did the television commercial "1984" introduce?
What did Regis McKenna call the "1984" ad that was aired during the Super Bowl?
When was the Macintosh branded as Mac?
Who designed, develped, and marketed the Mac computers?
What did Steve Jobs introduce on January 24, 1984?
What interface type did the original Macintosh include?
When did Apple begin phasing out Macintosh in favor of "Mac"?
When was the activity of desktop publishing first used?
What company was desktop publishing unique to at it's beginning?
What three things were combined to develop desktop publishing?
What did desktop publishing enable users to do?
What applications strengthened Mac's position as a graphics computer?
What year was Raskin hired by Apple?
Who did Raskin immediately hire to help him on the Apple project in 1979?
Who comprised the original Mac team besides Raskin?
Who eventually lead the project on the Mac team?
How many Macs did Apple sell worldwide during the 2009 holiday season?
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2010?
What was Apples market share of all computer shipments in 2011?
What ranking was Apple in the PC global market share during 2014?
Who outperformed Apple in the 2014 PC global market share?
In 1987, what did Apple spin off its software business as?
Which series of applications was Claris responsible for inventing?
What did Claris rename the Informix Wingz spreadsheet program?
What was ClarisWorks renamed beginning with version 5.0?
When was ClarisWorks reincorporated back into Apple?
What two applications came bundled with Macs 2 days after "1984" was aired?
Why did many software developers choose not to redesign the Mac operating system and rewrite the programming code?
What year did Microsoft's MultiPlan migrate over from MS-DOS?
What year was Apple's Macintosh Office suite introduced?
What did Apple's "Lemmings" ad, which introduced Macintosh Office, do that made the ad unsuccessful?
According to NPD, who has generally dominated the premium PC market?
What was Macintosh ranked on the "list of intended brands for desktop purchases" for the 2011 holiday season?
Who did Macintosh displace from 2nd place on the 2012 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?
Who did Macintosh displace from 1st place on the 2013 holiday season "list of intended brands for desktop purchases"?
Which of Apple's products is focused on the ultraportable niche of PC's?
What part of the Mac's could not be expanded easily in 1984?
What did Mac's lack in 1984 and have no means to easily attach?
What did some small companies suggest Mac's 16 memory chips be replaced with?
How much more memory did Apple's Macintosh 512K, introduced in 1984, have than the original?
What was replaced in the upgrade that was offered for 128k Macs?
On what grounds did Apple sue Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard in 1988?
How was the lawsuit decided for Apple vs. Microsoft and Hewlett-Packard?
How long did the FSF boycott GNU software for the Macintosh platform?
What are some of the issues Apple cited in the lawsuit against Microsoft and HP?
What did the FSF feel that Apple was trying to monopolize on?
What did Apple's creation of too many similar models do to potential buyers?
What was the hardware manufactured by third parties for Apple's System 7 known as?
What did the Macintosh clones provide for consumers?
What did Macintosh clones succeed in increasing for Macintosh?
Who did the Macintosh clones hurt financially?
When did Apple begin shipping computers with CD-RW drives?
Who admitted that Apple was late to the party with writable CD technology?
What did Apple begin offering as standard features meant for playing DVD's?
Which Apple campaign did some people feel encouraged media piracy?
What is the name of one of Apple's unsuccessful products?
What was the name of Apple's first portable computer?
When was the Macintosh Portable first released?
What replaced the Macintosh Portable in 1991?
What was the 1993 PowerBook 165c Apple's first portable computer to feature?
Which generation of PowerBooks introduced trackpads?
What was Apple's Mac OS X based on?
Who did Apple make Maverick free to?
What computers is Maverick compatible with?
What brought better multi display support to Mac?
When was Mavericks introduced?
What desktop did Apple release after the discontinued Power Macintosh G3?
Why were sales of the Power Mac G4 Cube slow?
What did the Power Mac G4 have trouble overcoming after they dropped their price and upgraded their hardware?
When was the Power Mac G4 discontinued?
How did the actual sales of the G4's compare to the sales expectations?
Historically, what is near-absent in Mac OS X compared to Microsoft Windows?
When did Mac OS X experience a large increase in malware attacks?
How was Mac's malware seen by many Mac users in 2011?
How many users were affected by the increase in malware?
What were Apple support staff initially instructed not to assist with concerning malware?
What was the market share of OS X in North America by March 2011?
Being positioned as a higher end PC, what is it misleading to compare the Mac to?
Apple has remained profitable since what time?
According to market research, who does Apple draw it's customer base from?
Whose return to Apple resulted in the company's reorganization?
Who refused to lower the profit margins on Mac computers in 1989?
What problem rocked the PC industry in 1989?
What did the component shortage of 1989 force Allan Loren to do with Macs?
Who was Allan Loren?
When was Microsoft Windows 3.0 released?
What did Apple begin to eliminate in 2002?
Why was the new iMac G4 considerably more expensive than the G3?
Who did Apple create the more affordable eMac in April 2002 for?
What was the main problem with the eMac's CRT?
After Apple's failed desktop sales, what products drove their sales growth?
In 2009, how many Macs sold were laptops?
What has helped Macs more directly compete with Windows on price and performance?
In 2010, what did Apple receive before other PC manufacturers?
What are the top-selling form factors of the Mac platform today?
What is the name of the most inexpensive Mac offered?
What did Apple consolidate in 1998?
What all-in-one product was created in 1998 through Apple's consolidations?
What did the iMac G3 do to the Mac reputation?
When was Mac's Xserve server discontinued?
What took the place of Mac's Xserve server?
Why did Raskin leave the Apple team in 1981?
According to Andy Hertzfeld, whose idea is the final Mac design closer to?
What did Steve Jobs offer Xerox to visit and see their latest technology?
Whose technology influenced the user interfaces of the Lisa and Macintosh?
What caused Steve Jobs to resign from Apple in 1985?
What did Jobs state that he expected Macintosh to become?
How many applications were widely available during Macintosh's introduction?
How many companies did Apple promise were develping products for the new computer?
How many Macintoshes had Apple sold after one year?
How many databases did Apple have available the first year?
Whose technology did Apple take advantage of when introducing the Macintosh II?
What powered the Macintosh II?
How much did the Macintosh II sell for?
What marked the start of a new direction for Macintosh?
What was the Macintosh II's new modular design similar to?
When Microsfot Windows 3.0 was released, what was it commonly said to not be as good as?
Who was Microsoft Windows 3.0 commonly said to be good enough for?
What was responsible for the drop in Apple's margins in 1989?
Who made the decision in 1989 to cut prices on Mac computers?
What was Microsoft Windows 3.0's performance comparable to?
What did Intel unsuccessfully try to push Apple to migrate to?
Which platform did Apple choose to use?
Who first rolled out Pentium processors in 1993?
How far behind was Macintosh set back compared to the new IBM compatibles?
When did Apple abandon Motorola CPU's?
What color was Apples new iMac, which was introduced in 1998?
What did the iMac replace most of Apple's standard connections with?
What did the iMac replace the floppy disk drive with?
What did the iMac need to use in order to write CDs or other media?
How many iMac units sold in the first 139 days?
When did Apple discontinue the use of PowerPC microprocessors?
Who announced the capability to run Windows XP on an Intel-based Mac in 2006?
How did hackers release their software for running Windows on Macs?
When did Apple announce software that would allow Windows XP to be run on Intel-based Macs?
What is the name of the software that Apple introduced for running Windows XP?
Who was initially reluctant to embrace mice with multiple buttons and scroll wheels?
What was the name of the 1st multiple button mouse introduced by Apple?
How many buttons did the Mighty Mouse have?
What did Apple introduce to take the place of a physical scroll wheel in 2009?
What Apple mouse 1st used multi-touch gesture recognition?
What type of software began to emerge following the release of Intel-based Macs?
At what speed do programs such as VirtualBox allow Microsoft Windows to run on Macs?
What is possible to run by using Boot camp, even though it is not condoned by Apple?
What do Macs lack that makes them unable to run many legacy PC operating systems?
What has been the best-selling ultra-portable over Windows Ultrabooks in the U.S.?
What earned the title as best all-around subnotebook/ultraportable?
What did the Air receive before other PC manufacturers?
Through 7/1/13, what percentage of all Ultrabook sales in the U.S. were MacBook Airs?
When was the competetive pricing of MacBooks especially effective?
What number was dell on the Fortune 500 list until 2014?
When did Dell go private?
Dell is currently the #1 shipper of what?
In which state is Dell the sixth largest company?
What PC vendor rank did Dell hold?
What market did Dell ignore at first?
When did Dell's internet site gain popularity?
What was happening to Dell's average sale to individuals?
When did Dell create their internal marketing group?
What sales model did Dell use for a long time?
Who were the main driving force behind PC sales?
Where were consumers going to buy devices other than online?
What market presence did Dell lack?
What was one city that Dell tested retail stores in?
What industry was getting smaller?
When did Dell fall behind Lenovo?
What other American company fell behind Lenovo with Dell?
What PC was taking corporate customers from Dell?
What company was Dell behind in profits in 2012?
Which of Dell's processes handles PC assembly, testing, and quality control?
Where did Dell configure their notebooks?
When did Dell describe their changing approach to manufacturing?
Who reported that Dell was offering to sell their manufacturing plants?
What manufacturers was Dell losing to efficiency-wise?
What type of Dell media has appeared on TV, on the internet, and in magazines?
One of Dell's marketing strategies is what kind of shipping?
What year did Dell cut its prices to keep its market share?
By how much did Dell cut it's margins when it cut its prices?
Where does Dell take most of its purchases for its products?
What year did Dell make an agreement with Officeworks?
What computer model did Dell ask Officeworks to carry?
In which country did Dell partner with Harris Technology?
What company did Dell team with in late 2008?
What year did Dell's Australian program end up shutting down?
What department did Dell launch an internal investigation on?
What was the minimum amount of earnings that would be restated by Dell's investigation?
What year did Dell's internal investigation begin?
Who did Dell agree to not buy processors from?
How much did Dell pay in fines to settle fraud charges against it?
What decade did Dell begin to sell things other than PCs?
IBM, Hewlett Packard, and Compaq were the major providers of what?
What servers did Dell create that they tried to break into the market with?
What year did Dell's enterprise revenue make up a large chunk of its profit?
Which company did Dell exceed as a server provider?
What market made up the majority of Dell's sales?
What advantage did Dell hold in the PC market?
What operation did Hewlett Packard and Acer make more efficient to compete with Dell?
Where did Dell miss out on sales due to relying on the internet?
What company stated that Dell was preventing itself from innovating?
What decade did Dell's manufacturing process become less efficient?
What plant did Dell close in Texas?
What state was the Dell plant that received $280 million but was later closed?
What company bought the North Carolina plant from Dell?
The plant in what US state still remains in operation?
What hedge fund group was pressuring EMC into restructuring?
How much has Dell's value increased since they went private?
What news source published revenue estimations between Dell and EMC?
What year did Dell go private?
In what foreign country did Dell open plants in 1995?
What percentage of Dell notebooks are assembled in their asian plants?
How much did Dell spend to construct a new plant in India?
How many PCs was Dell's Indian plant slated to make in 2007?
Who is the founder of Dell?
How many board members does Dell have?
How many committees are appointed by the board of directors at Dell?
Which Dell committee handles accounting issues?
Which Dell committee keeps the company from violating antitrust laws?
What decade did Dell sell electronics through big box stores?
what year did Dell stop selling products through physical retailers?
What store did Dell sell electronics at in 2003?
What year did Dell begin selling products at retailers again?
Who is the largest electronics retailer in the US? 
What was Dell the first IT company to establish?
What year did Dell enact its global consumer recycling program?
How much electronics did Dell recycle by 2009?
What year was 78 million pounds of Dell equipment recycled?
What percentage of Dell electronics from the previous seven years were recycled?
What decade did Dell switch to PSUs and boards that had differently wired connectors?
With what kind of parts were consumers able to upgrade their Dell systems with?
What year did Dell revert its power connectors to industry standard ones?
What part of their motherboards does Dell not reveal the specifications of?
When did Michael Dell found his company?
How much did Dell receive as capital from his family?
What school did Dell go to and later drop out of while he ran his business?
What year did Dell design its own computer?
How much did Dell profit in its first year?
What did Dell enjoy from 1997 to 2004?
What company did Dell overtake as the largest PC manufacturer?
How much were Dell profiting in 2002?
What company did Compaq merge with in 2002?
What company was the fastest growing in the early 2000s?
What did Dell rely on that gave it a reputation?
What did Dell maintain lower spending on than its competitors?
What was Dell's organizational structure considered?
Dell lagged behind Hewlett Packard and Oracle in delivering what kind of solutions?
What was the name of Dell's change campaign?
Who relinquished his position as CEO to take a seat on the board?
Michael Dell removed employee bonuses from what year with his new incentive?
Who replaced Jim Schneider as Dell CFO?
How much of Dell's revenue was its PC division?
Who was Dell's main business rival?
How much did Dell spend on acquiring different divisions?
What happened to Dell's revenue and share price in the post-PC market?
What city is Dell's New Hampshire facility in?
What city is Dell's Tennessee facility in?
What city is Dell's Minnesota facility in?
What city is Dell's Florida facility in?
What city is Dell's Texas facility in?
What year was Dell's Tennessee facility opened?
What state was the Dell plant that received $280 million in incentives in?
What continent did a lot of work from Dell's plants get transferred to?
What subsidiary of Dell remains operating in Florida?
What emissions did Dell strive to reduce?
By 2015, how much did Dell slate to reduce its emissions?
What year did Dell rank 2nd for product greenness?
What organization scores electronics manufacturers based on how environmentally friendly their products are? 
What year did Dell come under fire from the Taiwanese Consumer Protection Commission?
What percent lower was Dell selling its notebooks in Taiwan?
What did dell sell for $19 in Taiwan?
How much did Taiwan fine Dell for its practices?
Innovations in what kind of management is Dell known for?
What sales model did Dell follow?
For the majority of Dell's existence, what were they a vendor of?
What company did Dell acquire in 2009?
What market did Dell begin to compete in in 2009?
What year did Dell plan to sell PCs at retailers?
What was one retailer that were going to sell Dell PCs?
Who convinced Michael Dell to not use retailers to sell PCs?
What position at Dell did Kevin Rollins eventually attain?
What year did Michael Dell bring in Lee Walker to the company?
What did Lee Walker recruit members to Dell for?
What year did Walker retire?
What was Morton Meyerson's position at his former company?
What country's PC market was Dell reliant on?
What percentage of Dell's profits were desktop PCs being sold to commercial and corporate buyers?
What year were Dell's PC profits shrinking?
What operating system was slated to be the next system upgrade for corporate clients?
Which division of Dell were unsuccessful in developing mobile devices?
The release of what electronic had a negative impact on Dell?
What Dell product was a commercial failure?
What line of high end electronics did Dell create that failed to compete with Apple products?
What year did Dell see its first decline in holiday sales?
What did Dell have a poor reputation for?
Where did Dell move its call centers?
Which Dell employee was moved from head of manufacturing to head of customer service?
How much had Dell spent by 2006 on improving customer service?
What year did the Blackstone Group express interest in acquiring Dell?
What was the first private equity firm to decide not to submit a bid for Dell?
What company did analysts feel would need to find an exit strategy to profit from acquiring Dell?
How much was the potential enterprise value of Dell?
What year did Dell close its largest Canadian call center?
How many employees lost jobs when Dell closed their call center?
How many workers did Dell plan to have at their Ottawa call center?
What percentage of its workforce did Dell terminate in from 2007 to 2008?
What type of computing is the combined effort of EMC and Dell slated to address?
What organization commented on the deal between EMC and Dell?
How much did VMware stock fall after the merger announcement?
What was the original valuation of the merger?
What was the value of Dell's buyout deal?
What year did Dell announce its buyout deal?
What was the value of the loan that Dell received from Microsoft?
What was the value of the second largest technology buyout?
How much space did Dell lease in Texas?
How many senior executives were slated to work in the building Dell leased?
What year did Dell announce its plans to sublease its building?
Where did Dell move its headquarters back to in 2003?
What was the total amount of space that Dell leased in Las Cimas 1 and 2?
What Texas city was Dell's headquarters previously in?
How many employees worked at Dell's Texas headquarters?
What year did Dell announce that it was moving most of its employees out of Texas?
Where was the board room located at Dells Arboretum building?
How many customer support employees did Dell move to Round Rock in 1994?
For what market did Dell make computers for in Ireland?
How many Irish employees did Dell hire?
What was the value of the aid package given to Dell that the European Union investigated?
What year did Dell announce it was relocating its Irish facility?
What year did Dell begin production in the Lodz, Poland facility?
What kind of hardware support does Dell provide?
What kind of customers does Dell provide support to for major outages?
What kind of support does Dell provide using a computer's service-tag?
What is the alternate name for the Dell Solution Station?
What Dell service offers certified technicians to tackle commercial technical support?
What Dell service offers remote desktop management?
What is the name of the Dell service that gives home-users a support queue?
What year did Dell lose its tech lead to Hewlett-Packard?
What was HP's growth during the third quarter of 2006?
What was the rate of decline that Dell experienced in PC shipments?
What was Dell's market share at the end of 2006?
What toxic chemical did Dell set to eliminate from its products?
By what year does Dell plan to remove chemicals from its computers?
What activists protested at Dell's offices in response to the usage of toxic chemicals?
What year did Dell launch its first products that were free of toxic chemicals?
What percentage of Dell support calls were transferred?
How much did Dell originally spend to fix their customer service?
What amount did Dell increase its customer service budget to?
What does Dell aim to reduce by creating energy efficient products?
How much does energy efficiency save Dell per year?
What is the largest contributor to Dell's energy efficiency savings?
How many PCs does Dell employ energy management software on?
What process begins after a death sentence is handed down at trial?
In a direct review, what type of court looks at the record?
How many possible outcomes are there of a capital sentencing direct review?
In a direct review, what court has its record reviewed by the appellate court?
What percentage of convictions survive direct review?
In what year was the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act passed?
How many habeas corpus suits does the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act normally allow in federal court?
What is the US Code citation for the Civil Rights Act of 1871?
Why does a litigant initiate a lawsuit under the Civil Rights Act of 1871?
Who was executed by firing squad on January 17, 1977?
In what state was Gary Gilmore executed?
On what date was John Spenkelink executed?
In what state did Jesse Bishop's execution occur?
How was Charles Brooks, Jr. executed?
What was a common nickname for the electric chair?
What color was Alabama's electric chair?
What state notably had electric chair malfunctions?
Due to electric chair malfunctions, what method of execution became preferred?
Prior to the popularity of lethal injection, what was the preferred method of executing criminals in America?
What state has had only a single execution?
When was the last person executed in the District of Columbia?
When did Oregon reinstate the death penalty?
In what year did an Oregon referendum succeed in restoring the death penalty, only to be shot down due to a court ruling?
What state notably abolished the death penalty and then reintroduced it, but didn't use it again?
In the United States, how many murders are there for each execution?
How many murder convictions occur in the US per execution?
How many states in the US have the death penalty?
What state has the highest rate of death sentences per person?
What does Alabama law allow judges to do that isn't allowed in other states?
What territory's constitution says "The death penalty shall not exist"?
What US state prohibits the death penalty in its constitution?
How many US states have passed laws outlawing the death penalty?
Under what jurisdiction can capital offenses still be committed in Puerto Rico?
In what year was the death penalty suspended in the US?
What Supreme Court case resulted in capital punishment being suspended?
Who was executed on June 2, 1967?
What amendment to the United States Constitution forbids cruel and unusual punishment?
In what year was the suspension of the death penalty in the United States ended?
What state's law says that death sentences must take place in an "enclosure"?
What state's law requires that capital punishment occur "within the walls" of a penitentiary?
What law has similar language to Missouri Revised Statute  546.730?
Along with United States Code Title 18  3596, what federal law limits the people who can witness a federal execution?
What state's law mandated that executions occur in ""room or place enclosed from public view"?
In what year was Gregg v. Georgia decided?
Along with the guilt-innocence phase, what is the other phase of a death penalty trial under Gregg v. Georgia?
What is the only conviction that can lead to the death penalty?
Along with aggravating factors, what other factors are considered at the second hearing?
What is decided at the first proceeding?
How many executions occurred in 1999?
What was the number of people executed in 2015?
In what year did the reauthorization of capital punishment occur?
How many people have been executed in the United States since 1976?
Which state has the largest number of people awaiting execution?
In November 2008, who was on death penalty without a murder conviction?
Who did Demarcus Sears kidnap?
In what state was Gloria Ann Wilbur murdered?
In what year was Demarcus Sears convicted of kidnapping?
A jury in what state sentenced Demarcus Sears to death?
When a prisoner is given a death sentence in a state, what is the first step of collateral review?
About what percentage of capital convictions are overturned due to state collateral review?
In 2010, how many death sentences were overturned due to reversals from courts or appeals?
What is an example of an issue that is raised in collateral review?
In what case did the Supreme Court allow Section 1983 to be used to challenge a method of execution?
In what year was Hill v. McDonough decided?
What amendment of the Constitution does cruel and unusual punishment violate?
What case notably upheld the use of a method of lethal injection?
Along with Section 1983, through what means can a convict on death row challenge his execution?
How many people were killed in the largest mass execution in US history?
On what date did the largest mass execution in American history take place?
In what state did the largest American mass execution occur?
What was the ethnicity of the people executed in the second-largest mass execution in US history?
In what year did the Admiralty Court hang 26 pirates in Newport, Rhode Island?
What act restricted the scope of federal habeas corpus?
How may state prisoners seek to have a death sentence overturned in federal court?
In what courts can federal habeas corpus suits be brought?
If prisoners use federal habeas corpus to present evidence that they're innocent, what must the evidence be?
Along with New Jersey, what state commuted all life sentences when bills to repeal the death penalty were passed?
The governor of what state commuted four death sentences in January 2015?
Who was governor of Maryland in January 2015?
In what state's supreme court was State v. Santiago decided?
How many people had their sentences commuted by State v. Santiago?
In what court was Bigby v. Dretke decided?
What court heard the case Penry v. Lynaugh?
What amendment to the Constitution did Penry v. Lynaugh address?
What sentencing factors did Bigby v. Dretke consider?
In what year was Tony Chebatoris killed?
When was Michigan's fourth Constitution ratified?
In what city was Tony Chebatoris executed?
In what year was there a failed Michigan constitutional amendment to allow the death penalty?
What article of the fourth Michigan Constitution forbids laws allowing capital punishment?
Under what federal statute are offenses punished by lethal injection?
According to what law are federal prisoners executed according to the procedures in place in the state in which they were convicted?
In what month and year was Juan Garza executed?
Who was executed by the federal government on March 18, 2003?
In what state is the Federal Correctional Complex in Terre Haute?
In what year did the American Law Institute create a death penalty framework for the Model Penal Code?
In what year did the American Law Institute change their mind about their contribution on the death penalty to the Model Penal Code?
What goal did the ALI's study say could not be reconciled with the goal of individualized execution decisions?
In what year was Coker v. Georgia decided?
For what offense did Coker v. Georgia forbid the death penalty?
Along with Georgia, what American jurisdiction allowed people to be executed for the rape of an adult prior to Coker?
What ruling forbid the government from executing child rapists?
Prior to Kennedy v. Louisiana, how many states criminalized child rape?
In what year was Nebraska's death penalty statute ruled unconstitutional by a state court?
What state's court ruled capital punishment unconstitutional in 1984?
In what case did the Kansas Supreme Court rule that the death penalty is unconstitutional in Kansas?
What method of execution did the Nebraska Supreme Court rule unconstitutional?
After electrocution was outlawed, how were Nebraska death row inmates executed?
What death penalty drug ceased to be manufactured in 2011?
Up until 2011, who manufactured sodium thiopental?
What is the nationality of the company that makes pentobarbital?
Along with anti-death penalty advocacy, why has there been a shortage in drugs for lethal injections in the United States?
The EU outlawed the export of products that could be used in what activity?
In what year did the most polled American support capital punishment?
What percentage of polled Americans opposed the death penalty in 1966?
In a 1977 poll, what percentage of respondents preferred life imprisonment to the death penalty?
In a 2006 poll, what percentage of polled Americans preferred the death penalty to life without parole?
What is a notable capital crime in Louisiana?
In what state is extortionate kidnapping a capital offense?
Along with Alabama, where is hijacking an aircraft a death penalty offense?
In what state is armed robbery a capital crime?
In what states is perjury leading to death a capital offense?
Along with Marshall, who believed that the Eighth Amendment forbade the death penalty?
Along with Stewart, what Supreme Court justice was concerned about racial disparity in death penalty enforcement?
Aside from Stewart, what justice believed that the death penalty could be constitutional?
Between 1973 and 2015, how amny prisoners were acquitted or received pardons or commutations of their death sentences due to possible innocence?
What percentage of murderers in the United States are given a death sentence?
How many murderers in Nevada were given a capital sentence?
What state notably executes 40% of those given the death penalty?
How much higher is the rate of execution in Texas versus the national average?
What percentage of murderers in California are given the death penalty and subsequently executed?
Under the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988 and Federal Death Penalty Act of 1994, about how many crimes were punishable by death?
What body passed the Drug Kingpin Act of 1988?
What is another term for the act of spying for another country?
Along with treason and espionage, what non-death offense is still a federal capital crime?
Who was executed on January 17, 1977?
By what method was Gary Gilmore executed?
Aside from Gary Gilmore, how many people were executed in the United States between January 17, 1977 and 1984?
What tactic did inmates on death row use to delay their executions?
In what month and year was Troy Davis executed?
Who was the Death Penalty Information Center director?
What organization did Brian Evans work for?
How many execution methods are currently used in the United States?
What was the most common historical method of execution in the United States?
In what state did the last burning at the stake take place in the US?
Who was the last person hanged in chains in the Untied States?
When was execution by beheading ended in Utah?
What percentage of American death row prisoners are African American?
What percentage of people executed in the United States since 1976 have been African American?
What percentage of American prison inmates are African American?
What percentage of homicides were committed by Asians between 1980 and 2008?
What percentage of the American population is Hispanic?
In the United States, how many important steps are usually present in the administration of capital punishment?
Along with the President, what officeholder can issue pardons?
How many death sentences were issued in the period 1995-1996?
How many capital sentences were given in 1973?
In what year were there 73 death penalty convictions?
On what date was Fred Adams hanged?
Where was Bethea hanged?
What was Roscoe Jackson's nickname?
In what state did the hanging of Adams take place?
How many people witnessed Timothy McVeigh's execution?
What institution does James Liebman work for?
What does James Liebman teach?
According to Liebman, about what percentage of death penalty habeas corpus petitions were successful between 1978 and 1995?
According to Tabak, what percentage of habeas corpus petitions were granted to death row inmates between 1976 and 1991?
In what year did Liebman announce his findings?
Who was executed on March 30, 1960?
What method of execution was used on James W. Rodgers?
In what state was Rodgers executed?
On what date was George York executed?
Which state executed James French?
About how many American juveniles have been executed since 1642?
In what year was Thomas Graunger executed?
Since 1976, how many Americans have been executed for crimes committed as juveniles?
How old was George Stinney when he was executed?
What method was used to execute Leonard Shockley?
What state employed Robert Patton in May 2014?
As of May 2014, what was Robert Patton's job title?
What race was Clayton Lockett?
What gas did Oklahoma decide to use for executions in 2015?
What was Clayton Lockett's cause of death?
Along with gender, geography and race, what bias do some opponents of the death penalty see in its administration?
According to opponents of the death penalty, what does the death penalty cheapen?
According to death penalty opponents, on whose moral level does execution place the government?
What do death penalty opponents argue that capital punishment isn't effective at doing?
Who do death penalty opponents believe may sometimes be executed?
According to Thompson v. Oklahoma, what was the youngest age at which a person might be executed?
In what year was Thompson v. Oklahoma decided?
In what month and year was Roper v. Simmons decided?
In Roper v. Simmons, how many Supreme Court justices believed juvenile execution to be unconstitutional?
Based on Roper v. Simmons, what is now the minimum age to be executed in the United States?
In what year did Missouri pass a law stating that executions should be inside of or near a jail?
What procedure did Missouri use to execute prisoners in 1919?
In the Missouri of 1919, who handed out passes to witness executions?
In approximately what year did a movement in favor of private executions begin in the US?
Who commuted all state capital sentences in 1986?
Of what state was Toney Anaya governor?
Who was Governor of Ohio in 1991?
How many women were on Ohio's death row in 1991?
In what year did Bob Graham become Governor of Florida?
Along with South Dakota, what state rejected a death penalty abolition bill in 2010?
Who did Idaho execute in 2011?
Who was executed on October 30, 2012?
Since 1976, how many prisoners has Nevada executed?
Since 1976, in what year was a prisoner executed in Wyoming?
How many drugs are used to administer lethal injection?
What lethal injection drug is manufactured by Hospira?
When did Hospira cease to manufacture its lethal injection drug for the United States?
In what country does Hospira manufacture sodium thiopental today?
What EU law forbids products used in torture to be manufactured in the European Union?
Who identified the active substance?
Who developed the method to obtain epinephrine in a pure state?
Who marketed epinephrine?
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?
As an inhaler, what was epinephrine used to treat?
Who developed the method to get epinephrine in it's pure form?
What could epinephrine treat?
When did epinephrine stop being available in the United States?
What trade name was epinephrine marketed under?
In what year was epinephrine discovered?
What was the trade name of epinephrine?
Who first discovered epinephrine?
What is epinephrine used to treat?
In what year was Primatene Mist no longer sold in the United States?
Who developed Amphetamine?
Who synthesized Amphetamine for asthma?
What are common side effects of Amphetamine?
When were tricyclic antidepressants developed?
What were some uses for Amphetamine?
Ephedrine was used as an oral medicine for what illness?
In what year was amphetamine first tested on asthma patients?
What was the trade name of amphetamine as a nasal decongestant?
In what year did the American Medical Association approve amphetamine for medical use?
In what decade were tricyclic antidepressants created?
What is diabetes caused from?
Why was insulin therapy delayed?
How can diabetes be induced in dogs?
Before insulin, what was the life expectancy of diabetics?
Who discovered that pancreatic extract reversed symptoms of pancreas removal?
Diabetes is caused by the removal of what organ?
Left untreated, how long were diabetic patients were expected to live?
What could be adjusted in a sample of pancreatic extract to produce purer insulin?
To purify insulin, Banting and Best sought the assistance of what company?
Minkowski and von Mering did surgical tests on what animal?
What is phenobarbital used for?
Who discovered a reaction that induced sleep in dogs?
What sleep aid was marketed in 1904?
What is amphetamine used for today?
Why was barbiturates and amphetamines restricted?
What compound was discovered to induce sleep?
What was the first trade name of diethylbarbituric acid?
What is phenobarbital mainly used to treat today?
In what year was phenobarbital discovered?
What was Veronal used for when Bayer put it on the market?
Who developed Arsphenamine?
What was the first effective treatment for Syphilis?
What complications are associated with Syphilis?
What is Amphetamine's market name?
Where is the Institute of Experimental Therapy located?
Bacterial infections could be treated with medicines containing what kind of dye?
What was the name of the first synthetic bacterial drug?
Arsphenamine became the first treatment for what previously incurable disease?
In what year was arsphenamine discovered?
What was the commercial name of arsphenamine?
When was Morphine and Quinine first available?
Who was the compound named after?
Who came up with the name Morphine?
Where were was Morphine extracted from?
Who is responsible for purification of compounds found in mineral sources?
Morphine was named after what Greek god?
Burroughs-Wellcome is now part of what medical company?
Who discovered morphine?
What is the name of the plant that produces morphine?
Who received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1939?
Prontosil is in what drug class?
Who is responsible for creating Prontosil?
What causes Streptococci?
Many deaths occurred before World War II due to what?
What was the name of the first sulfonamine antibiotic?
What award did Domagk receive in 1939?
Anti-infective drugs became more prominent after what war?
Were sulfonamides more or less toxic than arsphenamine?
Streptococci and other pathogens could be treated by what type of antibiotics?
Who created the first rabies vaccine?
How many cases of Diphtheria were there in 1921?
In 1923, what was discovered to be safer to treat Diphtheria Toxin?
Who created a vaccine to treat Japanese Encephalitis?
How many deaths occurred due to Diphtheria?
The rabies vaccine was created in what year?
In what year was the diphtheria vaccine made?
What compound made the diphtheria vaccine safer to use?
Who developed the first encephalitis vaccine? 
What company did Hilleman later work for?
Who manufactured "Elixir Sulfanilamide"?
What was one of the things the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act do?
What year did Congress pass the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act?
What drug killed 100 people in 1937?
What is Diethylene Glycol commonly used for now?
What company manufactured Elixir Sulfanilamide? 
What drug killed over 100 people in 1937?
Diethylene glycol is mainly used today as what liquid?
What law did Congress pass following the Elixir Sulfanilamide incident?
The name "elixir" implied a solution in what liquid?
When was the first effective treatment for Tuberculosis discovered?
50% of tuberculosis-infected people died within 5 years where?
What drug effectively treated Tuberculosis?
Who was Eli Lilly's work based off of?
Where was Tetracyclines discovered?
What was the first treatment for tuberculosis?
What percentage of patients infected with tuberculosis died within 5 years?
In what year was streptomycin discovered?
Many more antibiotics were made following the end of what war?
What company funded the research that led to the discovery of streptomycin?
When was the Polio vaccine created?
Who announced that SV40 was not associated with cancer?
Who identified the SV40 virus?
What was a complication of the SV40 virus?
Who funded the Polio vaccine?
In what year was the polio vaccine created?
Who created the polio vaccine?
What virus caused tumors in most mammals?
Who identified the SV40 virus?
SV40 was present in what vaccine?
How much was the settlement GlaxoSmithKline agree to?
What was one of the causes of the health-care fraud case?
When did GlaxoSmithKline plead guilty?
What drugs were related to a kickback scheme?
What drugs were used for off-label uses?
In what year did GlaxoSmithKline pay a $3 billion dollar settlement?
How much was the largest healthcare fraud case in the US settled for?
What company was sued for promoting medicines for unlicensed uses and bribing doctors?
What is the speculation of the relationship between doctors and the drug industry?
What is the Physician Financial Transparency Report part of?
Where can you obtain information about the Sunshine Act?
What information is collected by Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services?
When did Centers for Medicine & Medicaid Services have to start collecting information?
The Physician Financial Transparency Reports was part of what other act?
In what year were Medicaid and Medicare required to disclose information about their relationships with doctors and hospitals?
Where can financial relationships between Medicaid, Medicare and pharmaceutical companies be found?
What is expected when the relationships are made public?
What disease had the biggest decline of deaths?
What was responsible for the decline in spreading diseases?
What period was the report issued in 1958 cover?
Who issued the report in 1958?
What were eight diseases examined for?
How much did the mortality rate of common bacterial infections decline between 1946-1955?
How much did the mortality rate of tuberculosis drop between 1946-1955?
Who issued a report describing the effects of antibiotic developments?
In what year was the FTC's report issued?
How much did treatment for each patient in Africa cost?
Who backed the South African government which caused the case to be dropped?
Who brought litigation to South Africa?
How many signatures were collected by MSF?
When was litigation brought to South Africa?
How many companies sued South Africa for its Medicines Act?
South Africa's Medicines Act allowed for the generic production of what kind of drugs?
How much did ARV drugs cost patients yearly?
How many signatures were collected supporting public health rights?
What Act forbade misbranded drugs?
What caused a Tetanus outbreak?
What act allowed premarket approval for drugs?
When did the Pure Food and Drugs Act get implemented?
Who restricted the federal government's enforcement powers?
What was the name of the law that required premarket approval for producing drugs?
What law banned the interstate distribution of mislabeled food and drugs? 
In what year was the Pure Food and Drugs Act passed?
Who adopted the Doha Declaration?
What did the TRIPS agreement accomplish?
Why are patents criticized?
What did the Doha Declaration do?
When was the Doha Declaration adopted?
What has been accused of reducing access to medicines in developing countries?
The Doha Declaration allows for what ways for monopolies to be bypassed?
When did the World Trade Organization adopt the Doha Declaration?
How much money was recovered through the False Claims?
What are some of the schemes used to defraud the health care system?
What is pharmaceutical fraud?
Who had the biggest fraud case settlement?
What provision rewards "whistle-blowers"?
What kind of fraud financially benefits a drug company?
Who is affected by pharmaceutical fraud?
How much money lost to pharmaceutical fraud was recovered in 2010?
Which act allows whistleblowers to recover money lost from pharmaceutical fraud?
What drugs reduce the risk of death and other events in people with high blood pressure?
Who conducted the review on Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs?
What were Thiazide Antihypertensive drugs used with?
What do ACE inhibitors do?
In what year did Cochrane release the report?
What reduces the risk of new onset kidney diseases and death?
What type of drugs reduced the risk of strokes and heart disease for people with high blood pressure?
In what year was thiazide antihypertensive drugs shown to help those with heart problems?
Who put out a report in 2012?
What has been argued restricted innovation?
What was a recommendations brought about from the report?
What is one thing excessive regulations causes?
What can be used to evaluate new approval processes?
What is excessive drug regulation said to suppress?
In what year was a report made to reduce the burdens of drug development?
What was argued to be holding back new knowledge for treating diseases?
Who discovered Hydralazine?
Why were the researchers recognized in 1975?
Who developed Chlorothiazide?
What is  Chlorothiazide used to treat?
What was the main shortcoming in the drug Hydralazine?
What was the name of the first oral vasodilator?
What is the most used antihypertensive drug today?
Beyer, Sprague, Baer, and Novello received what award in 1975?
In what year was hydralazine discovered?
Chlorothiazide helped reduce the mortality rate among those with what disease?
What act needed provisions?
Who led the congressional hearings?
What were the major issues that needed to be addressed?
What caused a need for more regulation?
When did this push occur?
Congressional hearings emerged addressing revisions to what act?
Who led the Congressional hearings in 1959?
Did the US Congress call for more or less regulation of pharmaceuticals?
What did the first measles prevent in it's first 20 years?
Who originally created the measles vaccine?
How much did the occurrence of serious diseases shortly after the release of the measles vaccine?
When did the Rubella vaccine come out?
Who recreated the measles vaccine?
In what year was the measles vaccine made?
Who helped refine the measles vaccine?
In what year was the mumps vaccine made?
How much did rubella, measles, and mumps infections drop after vaccination?
Measles vaccinations helped prevent how many estimated cases of the illness?
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment become a law?
What did this new law require?
What did the National Academy of Science's study discover?
How long after the National Academy of Science's study did a study on over the counter drugs occur?
What brought up enhancement of drug regulations?
When did the Kefauver-Harris Amendment became law?
What federal agency regulated the advertising of prescription drugs?
Drugs made between which years had to be tested before going to market?
What percentage of drugs were shown to be ineffective after an FDA study?
How many Americans were given the drug Kevadon?
When was the drug taken off shelves in Germany?
How many newborns were born with issues due to Kevadon?
How was Kevadon distributed to doctors?
Why was this drug pulled off shelves?
In what year was thalidomide banned in Germany?
What adverse effect was thalidomide associated with?
Thalidomide was distributed in the USA by what name?
About how many Americans received thalidomide in a supposed study?
How many newborn American babies were affected by thalidomide?
What law prohibited birth control?
When was Enovid first approved?
What increased due to the availability of birth control?
Who created the first oral birth control?
In 1965, how many women were on the birth control pill?
Discussing contraception sometimes led to prosecution under what laws?
What was the name of the first oral contraceptive?
By 1965, about how many American women were taking Enovid?
When did the FDA approve Enovid?
Birth control was prohibited in most countries before what war?
Who received the Laser-Debakey Clinical Medical Research Aware?
How much money did Merk make in 1995?
How many patients received Zocor?
What study did Merk sponsor in 1994?
What did the study reveal after 5 years?
What was the brand name of simvastatin?
Patients treated with Zocor had their cholesterol reduced by how much?
How much did Zocor reduce the chance of dying from a heart attack?
How much money did Merck make from sales of Zocor and Mevacor?
Endo received what award in 2008?
What is a drug discovery?
Who is usually responsible for early stages of drug discovery?
What is used to manipulate pathways?
What is involved in drug discovery?
What focuses on metabolic pathways?
What is the name of the process in which possible drugs are discovered?
What groups carry out most early drug discoveries?
What kind of technology studies the understanding and manipulation of disease states and pathogens?
Most drugs have been found by isolating what from traditional remedies?
How much does it cost to develop a new drug?
How many approvals of new drugs happen every year?
Who is responsible for approval or rejection of new drugs?
How many drugs were approved in 2007?
Who reported the stable average rate in 2012?
What does NMEs stand for?
How many pharmaceutical drugs were approved on average since 2001?
What is the approximate cost of developing a new drug, including the costs of failure?
What has been the stable approval rate of new drugs?
What drugs are the least expensive to develop?
What accounts for nearly half of the costs to develop drugs?
What is the consequence in the value chain?
What happens when companies outsource?
What is re-formulations of active ingredients referred to?
Investing capital can increase drug development costs by how much?
What kind of companies have had a more important role in drug development?
What firms tend to outsource drug development?
Why was Mevastatin never marketed?
Who discovered Mevastatin?
What is HMG-CoA responsible for producing?
Where did Endo discover ML-236B?
What was discovered in long term studies?
In what year was mevastatin discovered?
Who discovered mevastatin?
What organism produces mevastatin?
What enzyme helps produce cholesterol?
How much did Pfizer settle the illegal marketing suit for?
What drugs were involved in cases of the largest criminal fines?
What was Pfizer accused of illegally marketing?
What companies have been involved with health care fraud cases?
What do illegal marketing cases fall under?
Firms such as Eli Lilly, Pfizer, and AstraZeneca have settled claims under what act?
Zyprexa was owned by what company?
Pfizer was charged with illegally marketing what antipsychotic drug?
Pfizer settled the Geodon lawsuit for how much money?
Who were some of the companies that encouraged the interactions between doctors and the pharmaceutical industry?
When did the article come out about the importance of interactions?
What was the reason behind these interactions?
What was believed to have created a financial conflict of interest?
Who printed the article about the importance of interactions?
What publication had an article about the importance of pharmaceutical industry-physician interactions in 2015?
When was the editorial published?
Did major healthcare organizations support or discourage interactions between doctors and industries?
Who conduced an investigation on doctors?
Billions of dollars have been paid by which companies?
How much was discovered to have been paid to doctors by drug companies?
What was the reason these companies have to pay fines?
How many doctors have been paid by varies companies?
A ProPublica study found that some doctors were being paid how much money for speeches?
Half of the top earners were mostly in what field?
Drug manufacturers paid off doctors a total of how much money?
Why are collaborative agreements important?
How do large corporations show vertical integration?
What are large companies relying on outside organizations for?
What are smaller organizations responsible for?
What type of integration do large corporations often do?
What type of integration do smaller organizations do?
What type of agreements are made to research potential new drugs?
What type of organizations are multinational corporations increasingly rely on?
Who is the core guide?
Who is responsible for approving drugs in the United Kingdom?
After an approval in the United States, when does an approval occur in the United Kingdom and other countries?
Who decides how NHS will allow drugs?
Who does the evaluations for drugs in the United Kingdom?
What UK firm approves pharmaceutical drugs?
What UK organization evaluates drugs? 
What firm in England and Wales decides if the NHS allows drugs?
What is the name of the core guide for pharmacists and clinicians?
What is subject to the Orphan Drug Act?
What is given to companies who develop drugs for "orphan diseases"?
Why are these companies rewarded?
What size of disease populations are subject to the Orphan Drug Act?
What is one financial benefit to researching orphan drugs?
What is the length of time of market exclusivity of an orphan drug?
What is a term for rare diseases in some territories?
Who argued against regulators?
Who argued that drug regulators were greater serving the interests of the drug companies than the patients?
The business friendships between which parties have been criticized?
Goldacre argued that which party didn't require that new drugs be improved at all?
NICE decides the availability of drugs in which two countries?
What is the name of the organization in Scotland that decides the availability of drugs?
What threshold must a drug pass before it is approved?
How much money did the top ten bestselling drugs make in 2013?
What was the name of the top-selling anti-inflammatory drug in 2013?
What was the bestselling drug in history?
How much money did Lipitor make before the patent expired?
In what year did Pfizer's patent over Lipitor expire?
How long do drug exclusivity rights usually last?
Governments grant permission to market drugs after how many years?
What enables a drug's owner to recover R&D costs?
What kind of drug is produced by competitors once a patent expires?
What decade was the pharmaceutical industry's "golden era"?
The safety and efficacy of new drugs must be approved by what organization in the US?
What type of filing is used before beginning human trials?
How many phases of human trials may be done after IND approval?
What type of application is filed after completing three phases of human trials?
What type of risk assessment results in approving the drug to go on the market?
"Drug reps" are usually hired by what type of firms?
What law regulates drug marketing in the US?
Who do drug reps market to?
Drug reps have been accused of giving what to health professionals?
Drug marketers have hired who as paid consultants?
What publications can drug ads be commonly found?
What concept determines relationships between Grand Lodges?
What must two lodges be in, in order to inter-visit?
What, besides Recognition, must happen between two Grand Lodges in order for them to be considered in amity? 
What can be causes of one Grand Lodge withdrawing Recognition from another?
What are the members of a Grand Lodge called?
Gran Lodges are in what when they are in Masonic Communication with each other?
What concept is used to determine relations between Grand Lodges?
What does each Grand Lodge maintain?
What is not allowed when Grand Lodges are not in amity? 
What are the two most common reasons one Grand Lodge will withhold recognition from another?
When did ceremonial regalia first appear in the Masonic culture?
How long have historians been seeking information about the Masonic movement?
What kind of an oath do Masons take when they join?
What is the oldest written document about Freemasonary?
When was the Regius Poem written?
When did Masonic historians star seeking the origins of the Masonic Movement?
What are the old Masonic document referred as?
The Old Charges are dated from when to when?
The fifteenth century also shows evidence of what in Masonic history?
The duties of its grades is an example of what historic documents?
Why did the Grand Orient de France conclude that Freemasonry shouldn't require religious belief?
What was removed from the Freemasonry constitution?
Who withdrew recognition from the Grand Orient de France?
What was a possible condition that made the United Grand Lodge of England withdraw it's recognition of the Grand Orient de France?
How was the belief of the existance of God and the immortal soul replaced in the constitution?
What year was it ruled that Freemasonry was not a religion?
What Grand Lodge had a withdrawal of recognition by the United Grand Lodge of England?
What was a motivation of the Grand Lodge of England's objection?
Who disputed the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils?
When were the first constitutions for Freemasonry printed?
Who composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasonry?
Which group was specifically excluded from Freemasonry in the printed constitutions?
What was created for women as Freemasonry began to spread?
When was the idea of the Lodges for Adoption abandoned?
When was the dawn of the Grand Lodge era?
Who composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons?
Who is excluded from Freemasonry?
What were lodges called that included women?
Who abandoned the including of women in Freemasonry experiment in the early 19'th century?
What are some Protestant objections to Freemasonry?
What are Catholic objections to Freemasonry?
Who is generally accepted as the voice of Freemasonry?
Who do the Protestant anti-Masons believe is the absolute authority on the use of mysticism, Satanism and occultism in Freemasonry?
What was Albert Pike actually more of an expert in?
What religion alleged Freemasons as Satanic?
What religion alleged Freemasons as unnatural and irrational? 
Who was controversial among Freemasons?
Who has spoke for all Freemasons?
Albert Pike's opinions were grounded in what?
What put English Freemasonry at risk?
What did the Unlawful Socities Act ban?
When was the Unlawful Socities Act implemented?
What was each private lodge required to provide to the Clerk of Peace every year?
Who did the Grand Masters call upon to explain that Freemasonry was not an unlawful society?
English Freemasonry almost came to a halt in what year?
Why did English Freemasonry almost come to a halt in 1799?
What act was made in 1799 banning any meeting of groups that had to take an oath or obligation?
Who gave the Freemasons an exemption of the Act of 1799?
What year did parliament rescind the exemption of 1799 given to the Freemasons?
What are two things that anit-masonry usually associated with?
What year did the Ba'ath Party make Freemasonry a felony?
Who wrote that it was not suprising that the blame for 9/11 was trying to be blamed on a masonic world order?
According to  Professor Andrew Prescott, how long has antisemitism gone together with anti-masonry?
In some countries, anti-Masonry is related to what?
Who change the Iraqi legal and penal code in 1980?
Who suggested the September 11 attacks on the United States were inspired by a masonic world order?
What do most masonic rituals consist of?
What is the first degree of Masonry?
What is the second degree of Masonry?
What is the final degree of Masonry?
What things come with each new degree in Freemasonry?
The bulk of Masonic rituals consist of what?
What comes after the degree of Entered Apprentice?
What is the first of degree ceremonies?
What is the final degree in the Freemasons?
What annual ceremony do Freemasons have?
When did English Freemasonry arrive in France?
Who were the first English Freemasons in France?
When did Freemasonry begin to spread to continental Europe?
Who formed the Grand Loge de France?
Who was the successor to the Duke of Clermont?
When did English Freemasonry spread to France?
When did Freemasonry spread to most of the Continental Europe?
The Grand Loge de France formed under who?
Who was the successor to the Grand Mastership of The Duke of Clermont?
When was the central body of the Grand Orient de France reconstituted?
Why was the Centre de Liasion et d'information des Puissances maconniques signataires de l'Appel de Strasbourg set up?
When was CLIPSAS set up?
What are two major sections of Freemasonry?
What is the Continental Strand consideres to be by most of Freemasonry?
What strand is considered to be irregular by the majority of Freemasons?
The CLIPSAS Organization was formed in what year?
How many Grand Lodges and Grand Orients are listed in the CLIPSAS list?
Does the United Grand Lodge of England communicate with any of the 70 lodges on the CLIPSAS list?
Whao has always opposed Freemasonry?
Why does the Catholic Church oppose the Freemasons so strongly?
Who issued the first Papal prounouncement against Freemasonry?
When was the first Papal prounouncement against Freemasonry made?
What was the most recent Papal prounouncement agasnst Freemasonry?
Who has the longest history of objection to Freemasonry?
What law banned books favoring Freemasonry?
The Roman Catholic Church objection to Freemasons are based on what?
What pope first issued Papal pronouncements against Freemasons?
What pope most recently issued Papal pronouncements against Freemasons?
What action is forbid by the Orthodox Greek Church to Freemasons?
What is the official stance on Freemasonry by the Greek Orthodox Church?
What would happen if someone in the Greek Orthodox Church became a Freemason?
When did the Orthodox Church of Greece proclaim being a Freemason was an act of apostacy?
Which other major religions hold the same beliefs, on Freemasonry, as the Orthodox Church of Greece?
In what year did the Orthodox Church of Greece declare that being a Freemason constituted an act of apostasy?
Freemasonry cannot be compatible with what according to the Orthodox Church?
Freemason cannot partake in what until they repent according to the Orthodox Church of Greece?
What belief is required of a candidate by the Grand Lodge?
Are candadites required to express belief in a specific religion?
Which branch of Freemasonry does not require a belief in a supreme being?
Which branch of Freemasonry accepts atheists?
Which branch of Freemasonry only accepts Christians?
Most Grand Lodges require a candidate to declare a belief in what?
Freemasons most common in Scandinavia only accept who as members?
What Freemason group accept atheists?
The Grand Orient de France is considered what type of Freemasonry?
What is Exclusive Jurisdiction?
What happens if two Grand Lodges try to establish themselves in the same area?
What can happen if two over-lapping Grand Lodges are in Amity and decide to share jurisdiction?
If two over-lapping Grand Lodges are in Amity and decide to waive Exclusive Jurisdiction, who must the other Grand Lodges recognize?
What must other Grand Lodges do if two over-lapping Grand Lodges cannot agree to share the territory?
What concept only recognizes one Grand Lodge in a given geographical area?
In what year did the Grand Lodge of New York Split into two separate rival factions?
When can Exclusive Jurisdiction be waived?
From what centuries are the earliest passwords and rituals of Freemasonry known?
What is the oldest Masonic lodge in the world?
What were members who did not practice the physical craft known as?
When compared, how similar are the rituals and passwords from the turn of the 17 - 18 centuries to the ones from the later 18th century?
What is the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world?
When was the Lodge of Edinburgh started?
When did rituals become similar between different Masonic Lodges?
Why was Prince Hall Freemasonry formed?
When was Prince Hall Freemasonry formed?
What happened when the UGLE was formed in 1813?
What did Africian Lodge, Number 459 become after they were removed from the UGLE?
What was Africian Lodge, Number 1 considered after they changed from Africian Lodge, Number 459?
What exists today because of the refusal of early American lodges to admit African Americans?
In what year was Prince Hall admitted into the British military lodge?
When was the African Lodge, number 459, formed?
When was the UGLE formed?
The African Lodge re-titled itself what?
When was Maria Deraismes initiated into Freemasonry?
Why did Deraismes resign from Freemasonry?
What led to exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England?
Who, along with Maria Dersaismes, started a mixed gender masonic lodge?
Who brought the message of mixed gender, practicing masonic lodges to the English speaking?
Who resigned from the Freemasons for their lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge?
Maria Deraismes and who else started a mixed masonic lodge?
What year was Maria Deraismes initiated into the Freemasons?
What year was an all-female masonic lodge created?
What year was the all-female masonic lodge cast aside?
What do Islamic anti-masonics link Freemasonry to?
Why do muslim anti-masonics believe that the Freemasons want to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque?
What is another group that anti-masonic muslims link to zionism?
What are most of the arguements by anti-masonic muslims centered on? 
Who's interests are the muslin anti-masonics afraid that the Freemasons are protecting?
What do many Islamic and anti-Masonic argue about Freemasonry?
Some Muslims argue that Freemasonry promotes what?
What article states that Freemasonry work in the interest of Zionism?
How many Freemasons are believed to have been killed under Hitler's Nazi Regime?
What kind of prisioner was a Freemason considered to be?
What identifier did the Nazis make the Freemason prisioners wear?
Who was responsible for creating antisemetic and anti-masonic propaganda?
Where is most of the informaton about Freemasons persecuted in the Holocaust located?
What is the Relch Security Main Office also called?
Who was responsible for ideological tasks of the written records?
How many Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime?
What did Masonic concentration camp inmates have to wear?
Where are the origins of Freemasonry?
What were the fraternaties of stonemasons origionally responsible for?
Where did the degrees of Freemasonry derived from?
What are the degrees of Freemasonry?
Freemasons trace their origins to what?
How many grades are there in medieval craft guilds?
Craft Freemasonry is also known as what?
Members of Craft Masonry are called what?
How are Freemasons invited to join a lodge?
How does one become a Freemason?
Can women ask to be a member of the Masonic Lodge?
How can you find a lodge to ask to be a member of?
Candidates for Freemasonry must do what before being initiated? 
Candidates are normally introduced to the lodge by whom?
Now days, many interested people find a Masonic Lodge using what?
Candidates are never what to a Masonic lodge?
What usually follows an initial inquiry of a candidate?
How large is the membership of Freemasonry?
What is the largest single jurisdiction of Freemasonry?
How many members does the UGLE have?
What are the membership numbers of the United States?
How many members does the Grand Lodge of Scotland and the Grand Lodge of Ireland have, together?
How many members are in Freemasonry?
What lodge has the single largest single jurisdiction of Freemasonry?
How many members are in the Grand Lodge of England?
The Grand Lodges of Scotland and Ireland have how many member?
The United States has how many Freemason members?
Are masons allowed to divulge the secrets of each degree?
How are oaths taken?
In what branch can books, other than scripture, be used for the purpose of oath taking?
What can be considered a Volume of Sacred Law?
Masons swear to protect their brethren unless they what?
Most lodges have the oath taken on what?
Mason swear at each degree to do what?
Where were the earliest known American Logdes located?
What is the earliest that lodges appeared in America?
When was a Provincial Grand Master for North America appointed?
Where did other American Lodges obtain their authoriisations from?
When did the lodges without prior authorisations apply to be recognized?
Where were the earliest lodges in America?
Who was the Collector for the port of Pennsylvania in 1715?
A Provincial Grand Master for North America was first appointed when?
The Provincial Grand Master for North America was base where?
How long have Masonic Lodges been in Iraq?
How many lodges existed in Iraq in the 1950s?
What is the greatest penalty that a Freemason in Iraq could face now?
When were all the lodges in Iraq forced to close?
When was a Scottish Lodge formed in Iraq?
When did Masonic lodges start in Iraq?
Who opened the first Lodge in Iraq?
When was the first Scottish Masonic lodge opened in Iraq?
All Masonic lodges were forced to close in Iraq in what year?
Who introduced the death penalty to Freemasons living in Iraq?
When was the United Grand Lodge of England Formed?
The Grand Orient de France and the United Grand Lodge of England continued in amity until when?
What year did the Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Louisiana appear in the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana?
In what year was a new code to the Canon Law issued by the church?
Who clarified the new code of Canon law of 1983?
Do Freemasons allow Catholics into their fraternity?
Judges and police officers had to disclose their Freemason membership in what years in England?
Who ended the English Masonic disclosure policy in 2009?
Justice Secretary Jack Straw ended the Masonic disclosure law on what grounds?
What is the basic organizational unit of Freemasonry?
Name examples of usual formal business that Freemasons have at their lodge.
What usually happens at the conclusion of a lodge meeting?
When does a candidate swear to fullfil his obligations as a Mason?
What does a candidate swear on?
How many degrees must a Mason swear to keep the secrets from outsiders?
Are Freemasons free to explore the craft?
What concept is based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, basic membership requirements, and tenets and rituals of the craft?
Is each definition of regularity the same throughout all Masonic Lodges?
When can a Grand Lodge declare another lodge as irregular?
All Freemasons are progressively initiated, passed, and raised in three degrees of what?
The initiations are part allegory and part what?
What is the final of the three steps of Freemasonry?
Who was the chief architect of the Temple of Solomon?
How many versions of the Hiram myth are there?
The Grand Lodge of England is also know as what?
When was the Grand Lodge of England founded?
The Ancient Grand Lodge of England was formed on what date?
The United Grand Lodge of England was formed on what date?
Lodges that could not endorse the GLE were later called what?
When did North American Masonic lodges recognize members of the Prince Hall Lodge?
Who is the Prince Hall Lodge open to?
Does the United Grand Lodge of England recognize Prince Hall Lodges?
When did the French try to create co-masonic lodges?
When did the United Grand Lodge of England recognize the two female Masonic lodges?
What did the french lodges promote to try to get women accepted into the Freemasons?
Do Anglo-American grand lodges accept women as members today?
What English Archbishop was a member of the Freemasons?
What former Archbishop of Canterbury has reservations about the Freemasons?
What year did Dr. Rowan Williams apologize to the Freemasons?
Dr. Rowan Williams was also Bishop of what?
Freemasonry was linked to scandal in Italy due to what?
The Propaganda Due Lodge was chartered by who?
When did the Grande Oriente d'italia charter the Propaganda Due Lodge?
The Propaganda Due Lodge was also know as what?
When did the Grand Orient d'italia expel Licio Gelli and revoked the charter of P2?
What is professional wrestling abbreviated as?
What are a couple of styles of combat based on?
Who are live events held by?
What is professional wrestling?
What kind of style does wrestling show?
How are the actions conducted?
What are the fan encouraged to do?
How is the end result of the match planned out?
What do wrestlers have to say about the realness or fakeness of the matches?
What part of the world has wrestling become less popular in?
Where did wrestling originally come from?
Where was wrestling later showcased in North America?
What is wrestling now thought to be?
What did television do for wrestling?
Where does the money made from wrestling come from?
Where large places are some of the major wrestling shows held at?
What has the internet been utilized for in wrestling?
what wrestling shows occur yearly?
In which decade did wrestling start becoming very popular?
What is one popular wrestling film?
What award was The Wrestler nominated for?
What are the names of a couple wrestling documentaries?
Where does wrestling keep coming up as a subject?
What is the biggest wrestling company?
Which companies are some of WWE's competition?
What are some other major wrestling companies?
What is the name of a Japanese wrestling company?
Who confessed that wrestling was not competition?
How have people reacted to the revelation that wrestling is purely entertainment?
How do many U.S. states handle wrestling?
How do the wrestlers treat the audience?
How does the audience being acknowledged by the wrestlers impact the show?
What can the audience do during a show?
What kind of conflict can arise during a show?
Which of the wrestlers are the bad guys?
Who wins in a wrestling match?
How could a wrestler win in the past?
How can a wrestler win in modern times?
In what instance will a match be declared a draw?
How long can a title match be?
What happens when a wrestler has a fall against them?
What kind of rules does a poly-sided match usually have?
What usually happens when two or more wrestlers are involved?
How can a champion lose a championship?
What is the most common of the special matches?
What must the wrestlers do in a ladder match?
How does one win a ladder match?
What is a common prize in a ladder match?
How many wrestlers are in a standard battle royal match?
What determines how the referee acts?
What is a common rule about referees? 
What are referees called?
How can a wrestler gain an advantage by using a referee? 
What kind of referees are occasionally used?
What are famous referees directed to do?
What do special referees have the ability to do?
What material is within a wrestling ring?
What is around the ring?
What is used for protection in the ring?
What does a "tag" entail?
What are two things that can be done with tagging?
How long does a wrestler have to leave the ring once they are tagged out?
How much time does a wrestler have once they tag in? 
What happens in a fatal four-way?
In a fatal four-way, who can make tags?
What was the most common type of match before the fatal four-way? 
Why are tagging rules made?
At what point can a count be started? 
What can happen to an arrogant wrestler? 
What might a partially conscious wrestler do? 
What happens during a pin attempt?
What is a common offensive move to break a pin attack?
What can the referee consider a pin attempt to be, even if the attacker is still on top of the pinned wrester?
What is a pinning method that isn't allowed?
How often are illegal pinning methods seen by the referee?
What are the illegal pinning methods called?
Can illegal pinning methods result in being disqualified? 
What happens with an illegal pinning move when it is seen by a referee? 
How can a wrestler willingly submit?
What is the move called where all limbs are incapicitated? 
What can a wrestler do to show a willing submission?
Several well-known wrestlers were famous for winning with a move called what?
What move did Tazz make popular?
What legitimate sport related to wrestling began to become popular?
Many holds will leave what body parts free?
When must contact stop between wrestlers?
How might a wrestler attempt to break a submission hold?
How long does a wrestler have to get themselves free of the hold?
What happens if the wrestler doesn't break a hold?
How does a referee check for a knockout?
What happens if all wrestlers are down?
If all wrestlers are down, how long do they have to rise? 
What kind of match has to end in a knockout?
What is another name for a knockout?
In what case can a referee choose to end the match?
What is one reason that a wrestler may not be able to continue?
Why couldn't Shawn Michaels defend himself? 
Where did Chris Jericho win in 2008?
What are a couple other ways to write countout?
What happens during a countout?
What will some wrestlers do to take advantage of the countout? 
What is the trick of sliding in and then back out of the ring called?
What else is disqualification called?
How can a wrestler be disqualified? 
In what case can a countout and disqualification be done away with entirely? 
What are the usual reasons for an automatic disqualification? 
What must the referee do to rule the match at an end via disqualification?
In what case can a referee's decision be overturned?
What is it called when a ref is knocked out?
What can wrestlers do when a ref is out? 
What is one way a match can end?
What is one reason a draw can result?
What usually happens regarding a championship during a draw?
What is another name for a one hour draw?
What kind of injury can cause a no contest ruling?
How is no contest related to a draw, if at all?
How can a referee's action result in a no contest?
What is the point of a match?
Higher attendance and more ticket sales can be the result of what?
Though the contest is staged, what can garner more interest from the crowd? 
What do most wrestlers do, as far as how they act?
What is the name of one wrestler who acts like a cartoonish character? 
The Rock's persona is seen as what? 
What is common apparel in lucha libre? 
What is the popular way for wrestlers to refer to one another?
Other than a company, who else can own a character?
How can a wrestler get around changing their ring name entirely?
What else might a wrestler do to obtain their ring name?
What are other names for a protagonist?
What will an antagonist usually do?
What is a wrestler whose persona is somewhere between the two norms called?
Who is generally the audience favorite? 
What might a character do with their persona?
What did Hulk Hogan become? 
Who has the most turns in the WWE?
Who is a wrestler who never turned? 
What did Stone Cold Steve Austin start as? 
What was The Rock's original character? 
What did Steve Austin become? 
Who helps out a wrestler with poor speaking abilities?
What sometimes happens with managers?
Who else can perform the manager role?
Who might participate in a love triangle story? 
What do most matches have?
What is it called when the protagonist loses?
What do they call it when a protagonist wins? 
What can be wagered in a match? 
What are rivalries often called?
How long might a feud last?
How long did the feud between Ric Flair and Ricky Steamboat last? 
What is an example of a popular feud?
What supernatural things have been portrayed in matches?
What can be used in a wrestling story? 
What romantic drama might be used in a story? 
What happens behind the scenes of a match?
Who else do bookers focus on? 
Who might they use a lower ranked title on?
What does it show when a wrestler has many titles?
What can be important in a wrestler's career? 
What do those accomplishments indicate? 
What has Ric Flair accomplished? 
Who held 10 records at once? 
What occurs when a wrestler enters the ring?
What does the music playing indicate? 
What typically happens when a match is won?
What happens with many wrestlers?
Who won the women's title in 1937?
What did Mildred Burke form?
What year did June Byers retire? 
What year did Mildred Burke retire? 
What is professional female wrestling called in Japan?
What is the short form for joshi puroresu?
What was the major joshi organization for two decades?
What does a mixed tag team consist of?
When did mixed tag teams start? 
What happened when a tag was made? 
What isn't uncommon in lucha libre?
When were intergender singles bouts fought on a national scale? 
Who was the first woman to hold a belt that wasn't exclusive to women?
What was the record before it was stripped? 
Who stripped the previous record? 
A wrestler may have a small person called what?
What else can a little person do in the match?
Who was Dave Finlay often helped by?
What else did Finlay do with his little person?
What happened to Hornswoggle?
Who are the most well-known wrestling bears?
What animal has been a part of wrestling for a long time?
What condition are bears usually brought in in?
Who do the bears fight?
How many states have banned bear wrestling as of 2006?
What does every match have?
Who is usually included in stories? 
What are the possibly outcomes of a story? 
What is Doink the Clown's persona like?
What might happen during interviews?
How do characters differ in Mexican wrestling?
How are Mexican wrestlers different? 
What do American wrestlers depend on? 
What else is lucha libre known for?
How does lucha libre's tag team matches differ? 
How is Japanese wrestling similar to American?
How does Japanese wrestling differ? 
What does Japanese wrestling combine?
What is the emphasis placed on in Japanese wrestling? 
What is a common background for a Japanese wrestler? 
What is expected of newcomers? 
What were wrestlers expected to do for decades? 
How did wrestlers have to act in public? 
What effects can wrestling have on the wrestlers? 
What do the fans have?
What sometimes happens with fandoms? 
Where have some wrestlers appeared?
What do some fans like to do?
What has the internet done for wrestling fans? 
Many companies who handle wrestling footage have been founded since what decade?
What companies did WWF purchase in 2001? 
What kind of notoriety have wrestlers achieved?
What did the Rock 'n' Wrestling Connection do?
What are some other career paths wrestlers embarked on?
Name a popular series of boxing films?
Who is the movie The Baron about? 
What episode of South Park dealt with wrestling?
What critically acclaimed wrestling film came out in 2008? 
Many of what forms of entertainment have portrayed wrestlers? 
What other areas has wrestling garnered interest from?
What areas of study is wrestling talked about in?
What did Heather Levi write?
What college has a course about the cultural impact of wrestling?
What impact did the revelation of wrestling being "fixed" have?
When was Roland Barthes book published?
What did Barthes believe a wrestler give the audience?
What was the name of Roland Barthes' essay?
What is wrestling sometimes called?
What is wrestling to people during a peaceful time?
What role does wrestling fill?
Who has studied the lives of wrestlers?
When did Beyond the Mat come out? 
Who hosts Real Sports?
Who are a few wrestlers who have had memoirs written about them?
What are the risks of wrestling?
What is the ring commonly made of?
What are common injuries in wrestling?
What other injuries have been connected with wrestling?
Chris Benoit was involved in what tragic event? 
Which constitution gave legislative power to protect intellectual property?
When was the Paris Convention?
When was the Berne Convention?
When did the Paris and Berne administrative secretariats merge?
What name did the merged secretariats adopt?
When was the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown ruled on?
Which court ruled on the patent case Davoll et al. v. Brown?
Who wrote that "only in this way can we protect intellectual property"?
What year did the "discoveries are property" concept appear in French law?
When did French author A. Nion mention intellectual property?
Jewish law includes which principle used to justify copyright?
When did Jewish law recognize copyright?
How long was a patent valid in Sybaris?
When did Sybaris offer patents?
Who grants a patent?
Who is a patent granted to?
How many requirements does an invention need to fulfill for a patent?
An invention is a solution to what type of problem?
What is a patent offered in exchange for?
What is the stated objective of most intellectual property law?
What do patents create an incentive for inventors to do?
Which view treats intellectual property as another type of "real" property?
Which recent law stresses international harmonization?
How much was the worth of intellectual property to the U.S. economy in 2013?
How many Americans did intellectual property create employment for in 2013?
Where has IP become a recognised asset class?
How many intangible assets are not being leveraged in the UK?
What is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission?
Where does the safe harbor to use a patented invention for research generally not exist?
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in the US?
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in China?
What type of law handles patent infringement cases in Russia?
When was the ACTA trade agreement signed?
Which countries signed ACTA?
Which doctrines allow limited use of copyrighted works?
What is the common term for copyright infringement?
What occurs when someone uses a trademark that is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark owned by someone else?
What does registering a trademark provide?
Where is a trademark protected without registration?
How is trademark infringement addressed in most jurisdictions?
How is trademark infringement addressed in a few jurisdictions?
Which type of intellectual property is secret?
What law do most US states use to protect trade secrets?
What US federal law protects trade secrets?
Commonwealth common law regards trade secrets as what kind of right?
US law regards trade secrets as what kind of right?
Which term is criticized as vague?
What does the term 'intellectual property' disallow intelligent discussion about?
Critics criticize what type of validity of the term 'intellectual property'?
Which term is criticized as having abstract overreach?
Who founded the Free Software Foundation?
Who said the term 'intellectual property' should be rejected altogether?
Who said the term 'intellectual property' "operates as a catch-all"?
How does Stallman advocate referring to copyrights, patents, and trademarks?
Stallman thinks what type of IP historically served as a censorship system?
What does Stallman think copyright served as a regulatory model for?
What does Stallman think was meant to be optional and experimental?
What does Stallman think copyright was supposed to trade temporarily for public benefit?
Who pointed out that "if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time"?
Who is one advocate of copyleft?
Who has objected to the idea of IP because "property" implies scarcity?
Having no natural scarcity makes IP different from what kind of property?
How much can IP be duplicated without diminishing the original?
What can be harmed by pharmaceutical patents?
IP benefits concentrated interests to whose detriment?
Whose interests are harmed by expanding IP?
Developments in nanotechnology are being undermined by what type of IP?
What type of monopolies does IP create?
Who recognizes that conflicts may exist between IP and other human rights?
When was a document called "Human rights and intellectual property" issued?
Who issued a document called "Human rights and intellectual property"?
Who said IP failures may infringe on human rights to food and health?
When did the WIPO adopt 'The Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization'?
For what type of goods are IP's ethical problems most pertinent?
What is an example of socially valuable goods?
What cost does IP rights allow companies to charge higher than?
Who might a higher price exclude from the market?
What type of creativity is excluded from the US definition of IP?
What doesn't current US IP law recognize the uniqueness of?
Requiring written records enforces what kind of bias?
The Western bias is that what form is more authoritative?
What is the American film industry's trade organization?
The Motion Picture Association of America is which industry's trade organization?
Which country is the world's largest producer of films?
The MPAA has advocated strong protection of what kind of rights?
What does the recording industry call piracy?
What type of company was Napster?
What law enforces digital rights management systems?
Which articles of the EU Copyright Directive address circumvention of copyright protection?
When was the Conditional Access Directive passed in the EU?
When was the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ratified?
What type of law handled IP rights before 1994 in TRIP signatories?
What type of IP did the TRIP agreement harmonize the definition of?
What is any sign which is capable of distinguishing one business's product from another business's?
What does Florida stand for 
What states border Florida 
What is the state capital of Florida 
Where does Florida rank in US population 
What city has the most people in Florida 
What is the longest Contiguous Coastline in the US 
What level is most of the land in florida 
What is the florida climate 
Some animals and reptiles native to Florida 
Name a National Park in Florida 
What conquistador landed in Florida in 1539 
Who established early settlements in Florida 
Who established 1 of the first Us settlements in Florida 
What people were discovered by early settlers of Florida 
What did Spanish settlers introduce to Florida 
What did Spain trade Florida for
Who did the Spanish take from Florida to Cuba 
What road did the British construct 
What river does the Kings road cross 
What were the names of the 2 British colony's in Florida 
Who was given Florida land grants 
Where did a large number of British Colonist come to florida from 
The first Permanent Colony in Florida is Now known as 
What did the Colonist cultivate 
What legal system was introduced by the British in Florida 
Did Florida send Representatives to Philadelphia for the Declaration of Independence 
Who did Florida side with during the revolution
What legal system is still used by florida 
Where did English and Scotch Irish descent move to Florida from 
Backwoods settlers of Northern Florida are known as 
Were the Spanish able to police the backwoods settlements 
What led to the rebellion in 1810 
What did the rebellion lead to 
What is known as the Bonnie Blue Flag
What did the rebels overthrow during the rebellion
Where did Seminole Indians raid 
Who did the Indians offer haven to
What is the first Incursion led by Jackson known as now 
Why did the US president say the Incursion of Florida was neccessary
Why did Madrid cede the territory to the US 
What was the name of the treaty which ceded florida to the US 
Which president was given control of Florida 
When did East and West Florida Merge 
What was an issue in the early 1800's 
What did congress pass in 1830 
Who did Seminoles harbor 
What was the name of the treaty of 1832
What did Paynes Landing promiss
What tempers the Florida Climate 
What divides Florida two climates 
What are Florida's Mean temperatures in  late July 
Low temperatures in Florida average 
The average daily temperature in Miami
What is Florida's nickname 
What is central Florida known as 
Hours of annual sunshine in florida 
What posses a threat each year to Florida 
What percentage of category 4 storms hit Florida 
How many storms hit Florida from 1851 to 2006 
What is found in Florida 
What did the last glacial period provide 
What are the Everglades 
How much sink hole damage did Florida suffer recently 
What is the population of Florida 
Where did florida rank in population growth 
What is the center of the Florida population
What state did Florida pass in population recently 
How severe are Florida disenfranchisement laws 
What doe s the law require for criminals 
Who does this law effect most 
How does it effect elections 
What percentage of the population considers themselves American 
In the 1980 census the largest ancestry group in Florida was 
How far back did some of the Ancestry go 
As of 2010 what percentage of Florida was white / non Hispanic 
What percentage of florida was white Non Hispanic in 1970 
What do many white long term floridian families identify with 
Most  white  Florida Immigrants descend from 
What percentage of the Florida population in 2010 was Hispanic 
What Origin makes up most of the Hispanics in Florida 
What percentage of Cuban Americans live in Florida 
What is percentage of Puerto Ricans in Florida 
What percentage of Florida was African american in 2010 
what percentage of florida was black in the early 1900's 
What did many black migrate from florida 
Where does the African population in florida have ancestry roots 
Voter demographics of florida in the 1950's 
what did the voting rights act provide for 
what president signed the voting right act 
What party dominated florida politics from 1930 to 1960 
Does Florida benefit from taxes
What party political party dominates Florida now 
How does Florida vote in presidential elections 
What do these candidates that Florida supports pledge  
The first post- reconstruction era republican elected to florida 
What is Cramer credited for 
Who was Claude R Kirk 
Who was Edward j Gurney 
What did the Democrat party do in the 1970
What did democrat voters do in 1998 
What are snowbirds 
What party dominates South Florida and Miami 
which party dominates most of the rest of florida 
What is the make up politically of florida's fastest growing area 
The area is viewed as what politically
The vote in this area since the late 20th century decides what 
What has reappointment done to florida 
What was challenged in 2012 
How did the Florida supreme court rule on the challenge 
What hapend to the Florida congressional map in 2015 
What hapend in the 2000 election 
How severe is Florida's Disenfranchisement law 
What did this mean in the 2000 election 
Why did the 2 districts have to be redrawn in 2014 
How many were ruled to be redrawn in 2015 
What was the court vote on the new congressional map in 2015
Are there any more changes coming to the map 
What was Florida's GDP in 2010
Where does Florida's GDP rank 
What are some major contributors to states output 
What was Florida named in 2011
What was the mortgage delinquency rate in 2008 
How many vacant homes in Florida in 2009 
What percentage of  personal income was spent of Housing in florida  
Where did housing spending ranking nationally 
What did Hurricane Andrew cause Florida to do 
What did Govenor Bush Realize
What industry was targeted 
Who chose to expand their corporation in Florida 
What architectural styles are in Florida 
When did the art deco area of Miami boom 
What does Florida have the largest collection of 
What other Unique Architecture started in Miami after world war 2 
What train line connects florida to the North 
Where does the Auto train originate 
Who does sunset limited service 
Two othe ramtrak trains that serve Florida 
What is headquartered in Daytona 
Name another race in florida 
What is the 24 hours of Daytona 
What does St Pete feature for a race 
What is Madonna's real name?
When was Madonna born?
Which is the other name that Madonna is always referred as?
Madonna became a fixture on which TV channel?
Who is known for maintaining her autonomy and reinventing her image in the music industry?
Where was Madonna born?
In which year did Madonna move to New York City?
Which record label did Madonna sign with in 1982?
What was the name of the album she released in 1983?
Name Madonna's Grammy award album in 1998?
Name a film role that Madonna acted in.
Which movie earned Madonna a Golden Globe Award?
Name one of Madonna's other business ventures?
What is the name of the entertainment company that Madonna founded?
Which year did Madonna sign a $120 million deal with Live Nation?
How many records did Madonna sell worldwide?
Madonna is recognize as the best selling female music artiste by who?
How many certified albums does Madonna have?
Since 1990, how much did Madonna make in her concerts?
Who is one of the founding members of the UK Music Hall of Fame?
Madonna was born to which religion?
Where were Madonna's paternal grandparents come from?
Madonna's mother was from which ancestry?
What was Tony's occupation?
What was Madonna's nickname when she was younger?
Which name did Madonna adopted as her confirmation name?
Which disease did her mother passed away from?
Where was Madonna raised?
What was Madonna's mother's reaction to her questioning about her illness?
Who did Madonna turn to for comfort during her mother's illness?
How did the Ciccone siblings behaved towards anyone brought to their home to replace their beloved mother?
Who did Madonna tell in an interview that as a young girl, she was lonely and always searching for something?
Afraid that Tony would be taken from her, what does she do?
In 1966, who did Tony married?
Name one child from the union of Tony and Joan?
When was Mario born?
What is the name of the middle school that Madonna attended?
Madonna achieved a name for herself in school by her unusual behavior and also for what other reason?
When did Madonna drop out of college?
Which restaurant did Madonna work in New York City?
Where did Madonna take dance classes at in New York City?
How much did Madonna have when she first went to NYC?
What did she also work as for other established artists?
Which year was Patrick Hernandez's world tour held?
Who did Madonna started seeing when she worked as a back up singer/dancer during Patrick Hernandez's tour?
What was the name of the band which Madonna and Dan Gilroy started?
When did Madonna leave the Breakfast Club?
After leaving the Breakfast Club, who did she formed the band Emmy with?
What was Madonna's debut single called?
When was "Everybody" released?
What was the name of the second single called?
Who produced Madonna's debut album?
Madonna's dance singles reached which number in the "Hot Dance Club Songs" by the Billboard Magazine?
Who was the boyfriend that Madonna moved in with?
Who remixed most of Madonna's album tracks?
Which song was Madonna's first global hit?
When was Madonna's album released?
Which number did Madonna's album peaked at the Billboard 800 six months later?
Who did Madonna's look and style of dressing influence?
When did Madonna's style become a fashion trend?
Who is the stylist and jewellery designer that created Madonna's look?
When did Madonna achieve global recognition?
How long did "Like a Virgin" stayed on the Billboard 100?
Madonna was criticized for her performance of which song in the VMA?
What was Madonna wearing during the performance of "Like A Virgin" at the VMA?
Her video of "Material Girl" was an imitation of which singer's song, "Diamonds are a girl's best friend?"
When did Madonna married Sean Penn?
When did Madonna audition for a dance role in the show "A Chorus Line?" 
When did Madonna enter mainstream films?
What is the name of the romantic drama film that Madonna starred in?
When did Madonna appear in the comedy Desperately Seeking Susan?
What is the name of Madonna's two new singles?
What song did the comedy Desperately Seeking Susan promote?
When was Madonna's first concert tour in North America?
Who were the opening act for Madonna's concert The Virgin tour?
When did Madonna have nude photos taken of her in New York?
How much was Madonna's nude photos were finally sold for?
When was the Live Aid Charity Concert held?
When was Madonna's third album released?
Who was the album True Blue dedicated to?
Madonna's album topped in how many countries chart worldwide?
What award did Madonna receive for her role in the film Shanghai Surprise?
Name a soundtrack in the film Who's That Girl?
When did Madonna sign an endorsement deal with Pepsi?
With Madonna's new video, Like A Prayer, the blasphemy that she portrayed in the video led to what consequences?
Who co-written and co-produced the song, Like A Prayer?
How many copies did Like A Prayer sell worldwide?
When was Madonna named "Artist of the Decade" by MTV, Billboard and Musician Magazine?
In the film Dick Tracy, who did Madonna starred as?
Madonna's role in Dick Tracy led to which award nomination?
Who earned an Academy Award for the song "Vogue" and "Sooner or Later?" 
When did Madonna and Beatty's relationship end?
Who did Madonna have a relationship with while shooting the film?
What is Madonna's compilation album called?
How many albums did it sell worldwide?
What is one of the title of the songs that was released in the Immaculate Collection?
Why did MTV ban the video for Justify My Love?
Justify My Love reached which number in the US charts?
Who did Madonna play in the role A League Of Their Own?
What is the film's theme song?
When did Madonna open her own entertainment company, Maverick?
How much was the royalties paid to Madonna for the music proceedings?
What was the name of the erotic thriller that shows scenes of sadomasochism and bondage?
When was The Girlie Show World Tour?
What was Madonna dressed in for the tour?
In which country did Madonna rubbed the country's flag between her thighs that anger the public?
What did Madonna give to Letterman to smell in his late night show that created an uproar?
What did the critics call Madonna after the Letterman show?
Which biographer described her song "I'll Remember" as trying to clean up Madonna's image?
The song "I'll Remember" was recorded for which film?
What was Madonna's sixth album named?
The single "Take A Bow" was at the Hot 100 for how many weeks?
Who was the fitness trainer that Madonna was involved with?
In the film Evita, who did Madonna play?
Which director did Madonna write to saying that she was perfect for the part of Eva Peron?
When was Madonna pregnant?
After securing the role of Evita, what kind of training did Madonna have?
Who from Times magazine gave an excellent critique of the film Evita?
What award did Madonna win for the film Evita?
When was Madonna's daughter born?
What is the name of Madonna's daughter?
When did Madonna's relationship with Carlos Leon ended?
What is the name of Madonna's seventh album?
What year was "Ray of Light" released?
Which electronica producer did Madonna team up with for Ray of Light?
Which type of music was popular during the 90s?
How many Emmy awards did Ray of Light won?
Who listed Ray of Light as "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time?"
How many albums did Ray of Light sell worldwide?
Which single in the album made it to the UK number one?
The single Ray of Light debut at which number of the Billboard Hot 100?
Which edition of the Guinness Book of World Record states that no female artist sold more records than Madonna?
Which film project did Madonna leave because of differences with the director?
Who was the director of Music of the Heart?
Which film did Madonna record the single Beautiful Stranger for?
Which award did Madonna win for the single "Beautiful Stranger?"
What was the film that Madonna starred in 2000?
What was the name of the film's soundtrack called?
What was Madonna's eighth album called?
When was "Music" released?
How many albums did "Music" sell in the first 10 days?
Who is Madonna's second husband?
When did Madonna marry Guy Ritchie?
When was Rocco John Ritchie born?
What type of birth complications did Madonna suffer at birth?
When did Madonna's Drowned World Tour start?
Which film did Madonna starred in that was directed by Ritchie?
When did Madonna appear in the play Up For Grabs at the Wyndhams Theatre?
What was Madonna's title song for the James Bond movie?
Die Another Day reached which number in the Billboards Hot 100?
What is the name of the exhibition installation that Madonna teamed up with fashion photographer Chris Klein called?
What was Madonna's ninth album called?
When was American Life released?
American Life reached which number at the Hot 100?
How many copies did the album sell worldwide?
Who did Madonna kiss at the MTV Video Music Awards?
When did Madonna collaborated as guest vocals for Spears single?
Madonna signed a contract with Callaway Arts and Entertainment to be a writer of what type of books?
What was the title of the first book Madonna penned?
When was the The English Roses published?
Madonna and Maverick sued which company for poor bookkeeping and mismanagement of resources?
Warner filed a countersuit stating that who lost 10 of millions of dollars on its own?
Warner resolved the dispute by buying whose shares?
Maverick became a wholly owned  subsidiary of which company?
When was the Re-Invention World Tour kick off?
HOw much did the tour earn?
What was Madonna's documentary called?
When was Madonna inducted into the UK Hall of Fame?
When did Madonna perform at the Live 8 benefit concert in the UK?
What was the name of Madonna's tenth studio album?
When was Confessions on a Dance Floor released?
Which award the the album win?
Which pop group allowed Madonna to sing a cover of their song Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!
What was the name of the single that was Madonna's twelfth number one hit in the UK?
When did the Confessions Tour start?
How much did the Confessions Tour make?
Why did the Russian Orthodox Church and Federation of Jewish Communities of Russian asked members to boycott the concert?
It was confirmed by IFPI that Madonna officially sold how many albums worldwide?
What was the charity that Madonna was involved in when in Malawi?
When did Madonna adopt David Banda?
What was Banda suffering from when Madonna first met him?
What was the name of Banda's biological father?
When was the adoption finalized?
What song did Madonna release for the Live Earth series of concerts?
Madonna had a new 10 year, $120 million record deal with which company?
What was the documentary Madonna produced and wrote about the Malawis?
What is the name of the first film Madonna directed?
Who was one of the five inductees of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame?
What was the name of Madonna's eleventh album?
When was Hard Candy released?
Hard Candy debuted at number one in how many countries?
Madonna worked with Justin Timberlake, Timbaland, Pharrell Williams and Nate Hills for which album?
Which single was released as the album's lead single?
Madonna surpassed which artist with the most top-ten hits?
4 minutes became Madonna's which number one single in the UK?
What is the name of the first tour with Live Nation?
How much did Stick and Sweet Tour grossed?
What is the title of the book by Madonna's brother?
The book debuted at number two on which best seller's list?
When was the divorce finalized between Madonna and Ritchie?
When did the High Court of Malawi gave the right for Madonna to adopt her second son?
When did Madonna appear in MTV for the tribute to Michael Jackson?
When was Mercy adopted?
Madonna known Mercy since going to adopt which child in Malawi?
Who initially protested the adoption?
Who insisted that Mercy should be adopted?
Who stated that he could not support the adoption since he was alive??
When did Madonna perform at the Hope for Haiti Now?
What album did Madonna released in April 2010?
Madonna granted which TV show the rights to her entire catalog of music?
What is the name of the episode of Glee that featured Madonna's songs?
What is the name of the clothing line Madonna released with her daughter?
Material Girl clothing line is released under which brand?
What is the name of the fitness gyms that Madonna opened?
When did Madonna released her second clothing line?
What is the name of the second film that Madonna directed?
Which year did Madonna performed at the Super Bowl?
How many viewers did the half-time show attract?
Madonna signed a three album deal with which record company?
What was the name of Madonna's twelfth album?
When was MDNA released?
Where did the MDNA Tour start?
When did MDNA Tour begin?
How much did the Tour grossed?
How many shows were sold out?
Who named Madonna as the top-earning celebrity of the year?
By 2013, how many did Madonna's Raising Malawi organization built?
When did Madonna visit Malawi's school?
Who criticized Madonna's charity efforts, stating that she exaggerated her contributions?
What was the name of the 17 minute film called?
Which company was selected to release the film?
When was secretprojectrevolution released?
What initiative did Madonna launched with her film?
How many submissions does the initiative have?
What award ceremony did Madonna appeared in?
What song did Madonna sing at the ceremony?
Which singer did she join on MTV Unplugged to sing?
When did Madonna premiered her MDNA skincare line?
Which city did Madonna contribute funds to help poverty?
When did Madonna's album demo leaked online?
What is Madonna's thirteenth album called?
When was Rebel Heart released?
When did Madonna embark on the Rebel Heart Tour?
How much did Rebel Heart Tour grossed?
Whose music had been the subject of a lot of scrutiny?
Who is the author of Contemporary Strategic Analysis?
Who has established herself as a Queen of Popular Music?
Who writes and creates most of her own music?
Who was Madonna's first producer?
Whose music speak about taboo and unconventional subjects?
Madonna was nominated to be inducted twice which year to the Songwriter Hall of Fame?
Which magazine stated that Madonna was the greatest songwriter of all time?
Which genre did Madonna started out in?
When performing with Emmy, how many songs did Madonna produce?
Who popularize dance music as mainstream music?
What is Madonna's second album?
Which 2 album show Madonna's artistic statement?
True Blue has what type of music Incorporated in it?
Which 2 albums explored the New Lack Swing?
Madonna brought which type of music to mainstream with Ray of Light?
What type of music did Madonna experimented with in Music?
Most of the songs in Music are what type of songs?
What type of songs are in Confessions of a Dance floor?
What type of songs does Hard Candy have?
MDNA focuses on which type of music?
Madonna has which vocal range?
What was the title of Madonna's Book?
Who stated that Madonna's voice are key to her rock roots?
When did Madonna take voice lessons?
Which instruments can Madonna play?
Who taught Madonna how to play the drum and guitar?
What instrument does Madonna play on her demo recordings?
How long did Madonna spent learning to play the violin?
Who was the guitarist that Madonna learnt from to improve on her skills?
According to who was the defining moment of Madonna's childhood with her mother's death?
Which psychiatrist said that when a parent dies when the child is young, it leaves a lasting impact?
Who believes that the rape Madonna experienced is the driving force in life?
Who felt deep sadness as the death of their mother fades away?
Who does Madonna's mum resemble?
Who is Madonna's favorite poet?
Who felt that her mother death was the driving force behind her success?
Which song made a strong impression on Madonna?
Who sang the song these boots are made for walking?
Whose favorite style is baroque?
Who grew up listening to David Bowie?
Name one of Madonna's major influence?
What is Madonna's religious background?
Like a Prayer reflects Madonna's relationship with who?
In which video did Madonna wear a rosary?
In which video does it show Madonna being scolded by her boss in Italian?
She dedicated Papa Don't Preach to whom?
Name one actor that Madonna was inspired by?
Madonna's Material Girl recreated whose look?
The video Express Yourself was inspired by which silent film?
Who stated that Madonna was a bad actress to watch?
Which one of Madonna's movie is a box office bomb?
Whose art influence Madonna?
Which video featured art from Kahlo and Remedios Varo?
Madonna collects whose painting?
Her video Hollywood was a homage to which photographer?
Which religion was Madonna dedicated to?
Which year did she adopt the name Esther?
The influence of Kabbalah is seen in which album?
Where did Madonna attend Catholic services in 2011?
Who are the Madonna Companion Biographers?
Madonna used which TV company to help with her career?
The most remarkable creation in MTV is whom?
What influence did Madonna music video reflects?
She transmit her avant garde style to which audience?
Which look of Madonna became a fashion trend?
What type of Spanish clothings were worn for the video La Ista Bonita?
Who noted that Madonna was reversing the gender role?
In which video was it the most obvious?
Who named Madonna the Greatest Music Video star ever?
When was Madonna awarded the accolade?
Who had new standards of showmanship?
Who earned a reputation of lip synching in the Blond Ambition Tour?
What came as an expense of live singing?
What did Madonna use in her concerts?
What was the microphone coined as?
Who is first to have reenactment of her music videos in concerts?
Whose concerts are extravagant live shows?
Who is the most influential recording artist of all time?
Who wrote the book, Madonna and Me?
Who said that Madonna changed the world social history?
Who said that Madonna is like post-moderm art?
Who changed the dynamics of the singers back to mostly female?
Who is the director of the curator of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum?
A lot of modern pop artist grew up listening to whom?
Who included Madonna as the most powerful woman of the century?
Who is the other woman who earned the title?
Madonna used what to benefit her career?
Who started a revolution in music with women?
Who wrote that Madonna is an almost scared feminist icon?
Who is regarded as a feminist during her time?
Who is an acclaim role model business woman?
Madonna generated how much in sales in the first 10 years of her career?
Who called Madonna a dynamic entrepreneur?
Who wrote that Madonna is opportunistic, manipulative and ruthless?
Madonna sold how many albums worldwide?
Who is the best selling female rock artist in the 20th century?
Who named Madonna as the top female touring artist of all time?
How much did Madonna make in all her concerts together?
How many MTV video music awards does Madonna have?
Who holds the record for the most number 1 hits?
How many songs does Madonna have on the Hot Dance Club Songs Chart?
Who has the most number one songs in an active BiIlboard chart?
How many top 10 singles on the Hot 100 does Madonna have?
Who is the most successful solo artist in the history of American singles chart?
What is the difference between a pesticide and a plant protection product?
What is the purpose of a pesticide?
What are pesticides most commonly used for?
What can pesticides protect plants from?
What item commonly used in hospitals, schools and offices is a pesticide?
What are three pests pesticides target?
Are pesticides chemical or biological agents?
What are possible cons of pesticides?
What are pesticides meant to prevent?
What is one way to group pesticides?
Give three examples of target organisms of pesticides.
What are the two types of biopesticides?
Which type of pesticides have seen rapid growth in development?
Organochlorine hydrocarbons effect what balance of the nerve fiber?
Why was the use of organochlorine hydrocarbons ended?
What type of herbicide selectively kills broad leef weeds?
What essential plan funtion is interrupted by triazines?
Organophospates and carbamates cause which symptoms?
What is one way you could group pesticides?
What is the main way that peticides perform their function?
In which direction do systemic pesticide generally travel through a plant?
Which parts of a plant do systemic pesticides generally attack?
Pesticides can be used to stop the spread of what dieseases?
What sort of pesticides would you find in ponds and lakes?
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in the US?
Which agency regulates safety of pesticides in Canada?
What kind of pesticide is DDT?
Why have DDTs been banned in some areas?
Is DDT 100% guaranteed to work?
How may species have been found to be resistant to DDT?
On estimate how many megatonnes of pesticides were used between 2006 and 2007?
What amount of conventional pesticide use does the agricultural sector account for?
 Pesticides contain at least how many ingredients?
How maney pesticides are offered for sale in the US?
What do monetary savings in crops from the use of pesticide amount to?
What amount is spent annualoy on pesticides?
How are consumers able to benefit from saved crops?
In which area do pesticides creat jobs?
How is the health of the general publis affected by pesticides?
Can pesticides have a serious effect on people?
What is one of the most serious effects of exposure to pesticides?
What is thought to possibly cause neurobehavioral alterations?
How many workers in agriculture die a year from severly poisining pesticides in developing countries?
What careers put people in danger of being exposed to pesticide poisining?
In developing countries, how many workers are exposed to mild pesticide poisining?
Why are 99% of pesticide related deaths in underdeveloped countries?
What pecentage of sprayed pesticides affect the wrong species?
What is affected when pesticides don't reach their target?
What is it called when pesticides are caught in the wind and carried to unintended areas?
Pesticides contribute to what sort of pollution?
What is the effect of pesticide drift?
Why are hydrocarbon pesticides not excreted?
How are levels of pesticides higher going up the food chain?
The movement of pesticides from wawrme to cooler climates is called what?
How could pesticides travel over hundreds of miles?
What feature is wanted to assist with reducing negative impacts of pesticides?
How else can negative impacts of pesticides be reduced?
What is one way by which pesticides lose their efficacy?
What may slow pesticide movement?
What is one thing that can be used in place of pesticides?
What natural product can be used to control pests?
Why are alternative methods of pest control gaining popularity?
What agency has offered acceptance of safer pesticides?
What is one non chemical way of dealing with pests?
What does IPM stand for?
How can the location and amount of insects be changed?
What is one thing that can be used to pull pests?
What is the name of the process by which pests are attracted and repelled using IPM. 
How much was Sweden able to lower thier pesticide usage?
What other country has reduced its pesticide usage?
What natural substance has been found to effectively increase crop yields
What amount of gain in crops can be contributed to application of composted yard waste?
What is one type of pesticide?
How long may it take for persistent pesticides to be broken down?
What quality caused DDT to build up in various organisms?
What is one way to classify pesticides?
What are sulfonyureas commonly used for?
Nicosulfuron, triflusulfuron methyl and chlorsulfuron can be classified as what type of pesticides?
The restriction of what enzyme allows broad-spectrum herbicides to kill plants?
The amount of material used as a crop protection measure decreased from 1kg/ha in what year to its current 1%?
Is the trade of pesticides and pesticide treated goods limited to the United States?
What commitee deals with differences in rules governing the use of pesticides among different countries?
When was the international code which governs the distribution and use of pesticides established?
How recently were voluntary standards of pesticide regulation updated?
What country has attempted to better the controls of pesticide exchanges?
What is one agency who is trying to help make the trade of pesticides safer?
What is one important thing that should be present when countries are trading with pesticides?
Are these agencies a requirement in the countries where they exist?
What is one measure taken to keep society safe from improper pesticide use?
What is a choice that users of pesticides can make that will lower risks?
What is one country that has sucessfully used IPM?
Biological and botanical derivatives have what positive effects?
Who has the ability to make the choice of using less harmful pesticides?
What is a measure of pesticides determined in EPA studies?
Who is protected by EPA regulations?
Pesticides are inspected often to make sure they meet up to date safety regulations from what period of time.
How often are pesticides produced more recently evaluated for safety?
How could someone learn more about how to safely use and handle an unknow pesticide?
What are pesticides that are thought to be extremely dangerous called?
What would qualify someone to use restricted use pesticides?
 The EPA or other groups who govern pesticide use may inspect what?
Agencies who regulate the environment exists in what regional capacities?
What is the earliest records of humans using pesticides?
What was used as a insecticide in the 17th century?
What decade did herbicides become common?
Who can be credited with finding out DDT is useful as an insecticide?
What is the source used to exact nicotine sulfate?
When were laws first created to regulate pesticides?
What might someone knowledgable about the history of pesticides call ther period of the 1940s and 1950s?
When did America establish the Environmental Protection Agency?
Countries which are established use what amount of pesticides?
Trends about use of pesticides have been published from which country?
What is the largest cable company in the world by revenue?
What merged companies are the largest pay TV entity in the world?
Comcast is also the largest media company in the United States in what broadband area?
In what areas of the US does Comcast operate?
Where is Comcast company headquarters?
What are some of the cable TV networks owned by Comcast?
What two national over-the-air broadcast entities are owned by Comcast?
Comcast owns what movie studio?
What company did Comcast propose a merger with?
What date did Comcast drop their proposed merger agreement with Time Warner?
What is the largest criticism leveled by consumers against Comcast
It has been alleged that Comcast's internet service has done what to customers? 
What monopolistic practice draws criticism of Comcast?
What dubious distinction has Comcast earned twice from The Consumerist?
How does Comcast's customer service stack up against its competition?
Who is the current head of Comcast?
Who co-founded Comcast?
In what year was Roberts ranked as the country's highest-paid executive?
What was Roberts' yearly salary in that year?
What is Roberts power on the Comcast board?
Besides customer problems, what other area is Comcast often criticized over?
What online media outlet ran an investigative series on Comcast in 2014?
How many Comcast employees were interviewed for that investigative report?
What online publication ran a feature from a Comcast employee in 2014 that received attention?
What was this 2014 article anonymously penned by a Comcast Employee called?
What is Comcast's stance on organized labor?
A 2004 labor dispute in what city highlighted Comcast's anti-labor stance?
What was one anti-union thing that workers in Beaverton were required to do?
What creative union aired grievances against Comcast in 2011?
In what internal publication was Comcast's union stance formally enumerated?
What magazine listed Comcast as one of its top places to work?
What is Comcast's affiliated entity in Philadelphia?
What newspaper named Comcast it's top place to work?
In what year did this newspaper confer this honor on Comcast?
On what aspect did Black Enterprise Magazine name Comcast a top 15 employer?
What was Comcast's share value in 1999?
What was Comcast's share value in 2009?
Comcast's revenues in 2009 were how much?
What was Comcast's profit margin in 2009?
What caused a 2012 spike in Comcast profits?
What was Comcast's lobbying budget in 2013?
Where did this lobbying budget place the company among all entities in the country?
What is the name of the industry association that represents all cable companies in Washington?
What is the name of Comcast's affiliated political action committee?
How much did this PAC raise for candidates in US elections from 2011 through 2012?
When did Ralph Roberts get into the cable TV business?
Who were Roberts' business partners in this purchase?
What company did this partnership purchase?
What city did American Cable Systems do business in?
How many customers did ACS have when Roberts and his partners purchased it?
How many paying customers did Comcast have in 1994?
Comcast's customer base in 1994 was good enough for what national ranking among its competition?
What sports network was Comcast a founding investor of?
In what year did Comcast take over a majority interest in QVC?
What company did Comcast sell its interest in QVC to in 2004?
What was Comcast's telecommunication business prior to 1999?
What company did Comcast sell their telecommunications company to?
How much was ComCast Cellular sold for in 1999?
What internet commerce company did Comcast invest in?
MediaOne merged with what telecommunications company?
When did Comcast acquire the cable assets of AT&T Broadband?
What did Comcast pay for this subsidiary?
What was the original name of AT&T Broadband and Comcast going to be?
When Comcast purchased AT&T Broadband, how many customers did they service?
Comcast's advertising and commercial production branch was called what?
What media conglomerate did Comcast try to buy in 2004?
How much money did Comcast offer for this company?
What month in 2004 did Comcast drop it's bid for this company?
Comcast dropped their bid to focus on acquiring what sports network?
Besides offering money, what else did Comcast include in their proposal to buy Disney?
Comcast joined with what media company to acquire a movie studio in 2005?
What movie studios did Comcast and their partner buy?
What Pennsylvania cable provider did Comcast buy controlling interest in during 2005?
When did Comcast formally announce its purchase of this cable provider?
How much did Comcast pay for this cable tv provider?
What was the name of the interface front-end introduced by Comcast in 2007?
What company designed this interface?
Smartzone used what company's antivirus protection?
The contacts and address book for Smartzone was called what?
When was Smartzone rolled out to customers?
What bankrupt company did Comcast partner with another broadband provider to acquire in 2005?
Who was Comcast's partner in the deal for Adelphia?
What was the price to take over Adelphia?
What government organization investigated details of this acquisition?
When was this deal finalized?
What media conglomerate did Comcast begin preliminary talks to buy in 2009?
What was NBC's parent company in 2009?
What ownership stake did Ccomcast get in this deal?
What company was forced to sell its interest in NBCUniversal as part of the purchase deal?
What other cable company was reputed to have an interest in NBCUniversal?
On what date was Comcast's purchase of controlling interest in NBCUniversal reported?
What did Comcast pay for their stake in NBC?
How did the FCC vote approval of the Comcast-NBC deal?
On what date was the sale finally completed?
On what date did Comcast buy out the remaining stake of General Electric in NBC?
What publication originally reported a potential deal between Comcast and Time Warner?
What was the value of the deal reported to be at the time?
When did Comcast hope to complete its deal for Time Warner?
Who was the head of the FCC at the time of Comcast's proposed purchase of Time Warner Cable?
What two organizations had Wheeler headed prior to joining the FCC?
What group sought to investigate the purchase on anti-trust grounds?
What Senate group held hearings on the purchase?
Who was the general counsel of the FCC in 2015?
Disney and Comcast joined forces to allow Comcast to air what sports networks?
What network was proposed by Comcast and the US Olympic Committee?
What city hosted the 2010 Winter Olympics?
What happened to the U.S. Olympic Network?
What is the name of Comcast's channel available to subscribers in east coast markets?
What is the name of Comcast's subscriber channel in Colorado?
In what year did Comcast Entertainment take over operation of Colorado's Emergency Alert System?
What New York area sports channel did Comcast help found in 2006
What baseball team was Comcast's partner in their New York sports network?
Who was the founder of Philadelphia sports corporation Spectator?
Comcast's purchase of Spectator gave them what sports teams in Philadelphia?
What was the original name of NBCSN?
Comcast bought naming rights for what college's basketball arena?
What was the second name NBCSN was known as?
What organization rated Comcast's customer service the worst in the country in 2004 and 2007?
Comcast's customer service was rated worse than what government organization?
When did the ACSI begin doing customer satisfaction surveys?
When Comcast's customer service rating fell 7%, what happened to its revenues?
What prime factor did the ACSI use to explain this anomaly?
What organization gave Comcast an "F" rating in 2010?
In issuing the grade, the Corporate Library found that a third of Comcast's board was how old?
How much did Comcast pay for flights of its company jet in 2010?
What conflict did Corporate Library note with Comcast's Board?
What name was listed on Comcast customer Ricardo Brown's invoice in January, 2015?
What consumer advocate took over the Brown's case?
What was the amount of disputed money that Comcast eventually returned to the Browns?
Comcast eventually refunded how much service time to the Browns?
Comcast also told the Browns they would do what to correct the situation with the name change?
Who is the competition open too?
How many clubs competed in 20011-12?
How many rounds in the tournament?
How many games are needed to win?
What league can compete?
What rounds are the qualifiers?
How many teams in the first round? 
What league enters in the third round?
In the modern era, has any non-league team reached the quarter finals??
Has a level 2 club reached the finals ever?
What do winners receive? 
How many FA cup designs have there been?
How many FA cups have there been?
When was the latest design intoduced?
When was the laws of the Game of Asscociation Football published?
Who was the FA secretary in 1871?
When did the inaugural  FA cup tournament take place?
Who won the first and second cups? 
When was the modern cup established? 
Was competition suspended due to the first world war? 
what year did competition resume after world war 1?
When did Wembly stadium open? 
What was Webly stadium called at that time? 
When did the competition celebrate its centennial? 
Is the competition open to anyone? 
Is there anyone automatically eligible? 
Who else can play? 
Can new clubs play too? 
Do I need a stadium to compete? 
Does anyone ever miss a tournament? 
What clubs have missed the competition? 
Why did they miss that competition? 
How did people feel about Manchester's decision? 
Did the club later regret their choice? 
May Welsh clubs enter the competition? 
Has a Welsh team ever won a competition? 
Have any other countries ever competed? 
Why can't those countries compete? 
Has any other  country been allowed to enter the competition since? 
Has the number of entrants stayed the same? 
How many clubs entered in 2004-05?
How many clubs entered in 2005-06?
How many clubs entered in 2006-07?
How many clubs entered in 2007-08?
When is the final?
When do clubs above 9 enter? 
Is there seeding?
What happens in the event of a tie?
What are the first 6 rounds? 
When does the final take place? 
Was there a time this was not the case? 
Why was that? 
Did that ever happen again? 
What happened during those years? 
Do clubs replay each other?
What is the most games played a team to reach the final?
When are replays played?
When was the first penalty kick?
What clubs were playing during the first penalty?
What is the cup called now?
Does the loser of the cup gain anything?
Did that used to have a different name?
what about the FA Cup winner?
Do the FA Cup winners qualify for anything?
Where are the semi finals played?
Is there a name for the specific venue? 
Where did the semi finals take place before then? 
What was the top most used venue?
Where was the cup held in 2005?
Where is the FA cup held today?
Why is it held at Webly Stadium? 
Do the people of London agree with this action?
Has the game ever fail to sell out? 
Do people oppose of using the new Webly Stadium?
Where is the final played now? 
When did this stadium open? 
Where was the FA cup held while this stadium was built? 
Where is Millennium Stadium located? 
Was it always held in Millennium Stadium? 
Where do the majority of FA cup finals take place? 
How many times was the FA cup playing in the Oval ?
What was the first year the Oval hosted the FA cup? 
How many times has Crystal Palce hosted the FA cup? 
How many replays took place at the Oval? 
Is the use of artificial turf allowed? 
What is the required quality of the pitch? 
How many professional clubs are there? 
What happens if the pitch is not up to par? 
Where was the first #G surface game played? 
How many parts does the trophy come in? 
What is the  parts of the trophy? 
How many trophy designs have there bee? 
How many physical trophies have been presented? 
When was the first design changed? 
Is the cup engraved for the winner? 
When does the engraving take place? 
how long does the engraved have from start to finish? 
Is the trophy decorated? 
Where is he cup presentation made? 
When did people start presenting the trophy after the game? 
when was the first trophy presented? 
Where was the first trophy presented? 
What happens to multiple cup winners? 
Did that ever happen? 
How claims to have stolen the FA cup? 
Did he act alone? 
How long go did this crime take place? 
What did Burge do with the cup? 
What did they do with those coins? 
Who was the long-serving president of the FA cup?
What year did Lord Kinnard die? 
Was the cup lost during that time? 
Where did it sell? 
Who won the bid? 
is the Fa cup sponsered? 
How long does the sponsor remain? 
Can they extend their deal? 
Who is the current sponsor? 
What is the competition called now? 
Do people look forward to Cinderella matches? 
What do people think about giant killers? 
Does giant killing happen often? 
Does the media showcase giant killers? 
What is a giant killer? 
When was the football league founded? 
Who is the only non league giant killer to win a cup?
What year did they win the cup? 
Who did they delete for the cup? 
How many clubs where in the football league? 
Who is the lowest rank to play in the  third round proper?
What level where they? 
How many teams competed that year? 
What place did Chasetown come in?
What FA cup season did this take place in? 
How many clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double? 
Who was the first clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double? 
Who was the latest clubs have won the fa cup as part of a league cup double? 
Has any club won both in a same season? 
What year did that take place? 
Has the final been played by a two clubs outside of the top divisions? 
Has the final been won by a club outside of the top divisions? 
Who was the first outside club to win? 
What year did that take place? 
How many second tier have made the finals? 
Who used to brodcast the matches on the radio? 
What was the first Fa cup radio broadcast? 
What clubs competed in the match? 
Wa the game broadcast in both cities? 
So when was the firs national broadcast? 
Who had FA cup coverage from 1988-1997?
How are the games broadcast now? 
Does anyone refuse to show them? 
Has a woman ever broadcast a match? 
What year did rebecca host the match? 
Who took over the package from Sentana?
Who show the 2011 final? 
Does ESPN still hold the contract? 
What year did this take place? 
Who took over after ESPN? 
What was designed to standardize the connection of computer peripherals?
USB has become what on other devices?
What has USB effectively replaced?
What are the different kinds of USB connectors?
Why were the designs for different USB connectors made?
The Type-A connector is usually what size?
What size is the Type-B connector?
What size is the most durable from the point of designed insertion lifetime?
What was designed for less daily connections?
What has reached 5,000-cycle lifetimes?
What was designed with frequent charging of portable devices in mind?
USB connections come in what?
What is High Speed only supported by?
SuperSpeed is only supported by?
When did the seven companies begin developing USB's?
How many companies developed USB's?
What was the goal for USB's?
Who was included in a team that worked on the standard at Intel?
When was the original USB 1.0 Specification introduced?
How fast was the slowest data transfer rate of the USB 1.0?
What was the fastest data transfer rate of the USB 1.0?
1.1 was the first widely used version of what?
When was the first widely used version of USB released?
What provides a fourth transfer mode?
How fast is the new SuperSpeed bus data signaling rate?
What is full-duplex in SuperSpeed transfer mode?
What are the power variants in USB 3.0 ports?
What do the power variants provide?
What does the Battery Charging Specification do?
What is a downfall of the Battery Charging Specification?
When were the plans to update USB 3.0 to 10 Gbit/s revealed?
What actually happened whenever USB 3.0 was updated?
When was USB 3.1 released?
What does the USB 3.1 standard increase?
When was the Type-C Specification 1.0 finalized?
What defined a new reversible-plug connector for USB devices?
What does Type-C connect to?
What connector provides four power/ground pairs?
Electronically marked cables have a chip that contains what?
What kind of cables does the fully featured USB Type-C contain?
What is the shortened version of vendor-defined messages?
The design of USB is asymmetrical in what?
How many devices may be connected to a host controller?
How are USB devices linked?
What HUB is built into the host controller?
The design of the USB is asymmetrical in its what?
How many devices can be connected to a host controller?
What hub is built into the host controller?
A USB host may implement how many host controllers?
How many USB ports may a host controller provide?
What are logical sub-devices referred to as?
A single device can provide an audio device function such as?
A single device can provide a video device function such as?
What is a pipe?
A USB connection is based on what?
What is a pipe named at?
Where do pipes correspond?
How many endpoints can a USB device have?
If the direction of the data transfer is from the device to the host, what does the host send?
What does a bi-directional endpoint accept?
What is sent if the direction of the data transfer is from host to endpoint?
What is started when a USB is first connected to a host?
What id the data rate determined during?
When is the device assigned a unique 7-bit address?
What does the enumeration process start by doing?
What happens whenever a USB host is restarted?
What do transaction translators do?
When does a USB 2.0 hub operate in high speed mode?
What kind of devices do High speed USB 2.0's contain?
What do USB's implement connections to?
What are the standards called that implement connections to storage devices?
What is the process of making a novel device look like a familiar device?
Why is the ability to boot write-locked SD cards with a USB adapter advantageous for?
Since when can most computers boot from USB mass storage devices?
What is USB not intended for?
What is an important advantage of USB?
Buses such as Parallel ATA fulfill what role in PC computers?
Several manufacturers offer what?
What do external portable USB hard drive disks offer?
What is the most recent standard for external drive connectivity?
What do the external drives typically include?
Media Transfer Protocol was designed by who?
Why was Media Transfer Protocol designed?
What was MTP originally designed for?
Why has MTP become the primary storage access protocol of the Android operating system?
What do older computers have to have in order for USB mice and keyboards to be used?
What is the hardware designed to detect in USB mice and keyboards?
USB keyboards and mice may communicate using what?
What connects PS/2 keyboards and mice to a USB port?
What performs bidirectional data translation between two standards?
What is difficult to do with a USB plug?
The USB specification states that the required USB icon must be what?
How is the USB icon located to each receptacle?
Receptacles should be oriented to allow the icon on the plug to what?
What do Type-A receptacles do on host devices?
What do Type-b receptacles do on target devices?
What do the receptacles prevent user from doing?
What networks do USB not support?
Standard connectors were designed to be what?
Why were standard connectors designed to be so robust?
What as a drawback of previous connectors?
How are the electrical contents of a USB connector protected?
How is the entire connecting assembly of a USB connector protected?
Where is the external metallic sheet connected?
What provides a degree of protection from interference with the USB signal?
This type of stage make-break timing allows for what?
What are the newer micro-USB receptacles designed for?
What is the minimum rated lifetime for the standard USB receptacle?
After a leaf-spring was moved from jack to the plug, the most stressed part was found where?
Why was the change made for the USB device?
What type of tolerances does the USB standard specify for compliant USB connectors?
Why were loose tolerances allowed for compliant USB connectors?
How is a weakness addressed in some other connector standards?
Due to size restrictions compliant devices must what?
USB cables and device have only what on their ends?
Hosts and devices only have what in terms of connecting to a USB device?
Devices usually have what type of receptacle?
Hosts almost always have what type of receptacle?
What has been used to connect digital cameras. smartphones and other devices to tablet computers?
What was standard for transferring data to and from the earlier type of smartphones?
How large are both mini-A and mini-B plugs?
When were the mini-A connector and and the mini-AB receptacle connector depreceated?
What is the micro connector designed for?
What is the easier-to-replace cable designed for?
What is the micro-plug rated for?
In 2007 who endorsed micro-USB as the standard connector for data and power on mobile devices?
When did the ITU announce that it had embraced micro-USB as the Universal Charging Solution?
What has energy-efficient one-charger-fits-all new mobile phone solution?
Who defined a common External Power Supply for use with smartphones sold?
How many mobile phone manufacturers signed the EU's common EPS (MoU)?
Who was one of the original MoU signers?
What are all USB On-The-Go devices required to have?
Non-OTG compliant devices are not allowed to use what?
Why are the Non-OTG compliant devices not allowed to use the micro-AB receptacle?
The OTG device with the B-plug inserted is called what?
What does an OTG device default to with no plug inserted?
What is the A-device responsible for?
What is USB?
What kind of wires does the USB 2.0 variant use?
What are the four shielded wires in the USB 2.0 variant used for?
How long is the maximum cable length the USB 2.0 provides?
What is the maximum acceptable delay per cable?
What does theUSB 2.0 specification require?
What is a unit load defined as?
How much is a unit load in USB 3.0?
What is the maximum amount of load a USB 1. and 2.0 device may draw?
What is the maximum amount of load a USB 3.0 device may draw?
What is an example of a device that requires more than 500 mA of current?
What is an issue that may occur if a high-speed external disk drive is powered from just one USB 2.0 port.
What does USB compliance specification prohibit?
What defines a new type of USB port, called the charging port?
When was the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.1 released?
What was the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.1 called?
What does a charging port supply?
How many types of charging ports exist?
What can a portable device recognize?
What are the D+ and D- shortened with?
What does the USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.2 make clear of?
What does revision 1.2 remove?
When was USB Battery Charging Specification Revision 1.2 released?
When did the USB Promoters Group announce the finalization of the USB Power Delivery specification?
What can devices request?
In all cases, both host-to-device and device-to-host configurations are what?
The USB Power Delivery revision 2.0 specification has been released as part of what?
What does the USB Power Delivery revision 2.0 specification cover?
Power delivery protocols have been updated to facilitate what?
What can sleep-and-charge USB ports be used to do?
What is normally powered off whenever the computer is off?
What remain powered even whenever the computer is powered off?
On what laptops are the USB ports marked with a USB symbol with an added lightening bolt icon?
What does dell call the feature that lets USB drives to remain powered when the computer is off?
On what laptops are the sleep-and-charge marked with a non-standard symbol?
When did the GSM Association follow suit?
UCS chargers will also include what?
When was this further endorsed by the CTIA?
When did many of the largest mobile phone manufacturers sign an EC-sponsored MoU?
What did the MoU make the manufacturers agree to do?
When did the IEC release its version of the common EPS standard as IEC 62684:2011?
Some USB devices require what?
Some devices such as an external hard and optical disk drive can use what?
What is another alternative for power for an external hard and optical disk drive?
What is the purpose of a dual-input USB cable?
What does the USB specification limit?
When is the inrush current affected by the USB specification?
What are USB devices required to enter?
Many USB host interfaces do not what?
What do some non-standard USB devices use?
What Negotiates power draw with the host interface?
What does the USB specification require prior to the Battery Charging Specification?
How is the USB data transmitted?
What does USB use to encode data?
To ensure a minimum density of signal transitions  remains in the bitsream, what does USB use?
What is a USB packet's end called?
What can skew due to hubs add?
What can this extra bit result in?
What type of protocol is used for USB 2.0 devices during a reset?
What is the special protocol during a USB 2.0 device reset called?
 A device that is HS capable first connects as a what?
Write operations to typical Hi-Speed hard drives can what?
 For USB 3.0, typical write speed is what?
What is the read speed for USB 3.0?
After the sync field, all packets are made of how many bit bytes?
How are the bit bytes transmitted?
The first byte is what?
Handshake packets consist of only a single what?
When are handshake packets generally sent?
What is provided by transmitting four bits that represent the packet type twice, in a single PID byte using complemented form?
IN and OUT tokens contain what?
An IN token expects what?
An OUT token is followed immediately by a what?
 a larger three-byte SPLIT token with a seven-bit hub number, 12 bits of control flags, and a five-bit CRC were created to do what?
 Rather than tie up the high-bandwidth USB bus sending data to a slower USB device, what happens?
How many bits of control flags did USB 2.0 add?
There are two basic forms of data packet, what are they?
A data packet must always be preceded by what?
What is a data packet usually followed by?
Low-bandwidth devices are supported with what?
All PID bytes include how many 0 bits?
 Full-bandwidth devices other than hubs can what?
These and other differences reflect the differing design goals of what?
USB was designed for what?
FireWire was designed for what?
FireWire 400 is faster than what?
The IEEE 802.3af Power over Ethernet (PoE) standard specifies a what?
Is USB cheaper or more expensive than PoE?
What keeps USB cheaper than PoE?
USB  was designed for peripherals to be what?
USB connects what?
Ethernet standards require what?
eSATA does not supply power to what?
Even though USB 3.0's 4.5 W is sometimes insufficient to power external hard drives, technology is what?
On a notebook eSATAp usually supplies how much power?
USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip (HSIC) is a what?
What does USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip eliminate?
When was the USB 2.0 High-Speed Inter-Chip adopted as the standard by the USB Implementers Forum
What was Unicode published as?
What was unicode developed in conjunction with?
What is the most recent version of Unicode?
Who maintains the Unicode Standard? 
Unicode contains how many thousands of characters in its repertoire? 
What are the most commonly used encodings of Unicode?
What does UTF-8 use in terms of bytes? 
What does UTF-16 expand? 
What type of code does UCS-2 use?
How are two 16-bit units used? 
What is the aim of Unicode?
Traditional character encodings don't allow what type of computer processing?
What is multilingual computer processing?
Bilingual computer processing uses what characters?
What is the major limitation of traditional character encodings?
What were the first 256 code points of Unicode made identical to? 
Why were the first 256 code points made identical to ISO-8859-1?
What does the "fullwidth forms" section of code points encompass?
What are the CJK languages referenced?
When was a surrogate character mechanism implemented in Unicode 2.0?
Why was a surrogate character mechanism implemented?
What are some characters not originally intended for Unicode? 
Why are some foreign characters rarely used? 
Why was the Unicode 2.0 codespace increased? 
What are the General Categories of Unicode?
What type of use is the General Category not helpful for?
What is the General Category in Unicode?
How many General Category properties does each code point have?
What exists within the main Unicode categories? 
What are code points in the range U+D800-U+DBFF known as? 
What are code points in the range U+DC00-U+DFFF known as? 
what is another name for a high-surrogate code point? 
what is another name for a low-surrogate code point? 
What is known as a character's scalar value? 
What is an ogonek? 
How does Unicode encode characters?
How are some abstract characters represented in Unicode?
What policy guaranteed that characters have a unique and immutable name?
What happens when a name is defective or misleading?
How long has this name immutability been guaranteed? 
Who was Unicode developed in conjunction with?
What does Unicode share a character repertoire with?
What includes topics like bitwise encoding, collation, and rendering?
What do the two standards differ in? 
What does the print on demand, core version not include? 
When was the Unicode Standard first published? 
When was the latest version, Unicode 8.0, released?
What was the last major version of Unicode to be published in book form? 
What year was it announced that only the core specification for Unicode would be printed in physical form?
Michael Everson, Rick McGowan, and Ken Whistler make up what group?
What does the Unicode Roadmap Commmittee do? 
What proposal has been made for the Mayan script? 
Where does the Unicode Roadmap Committee post information on these scripts?
How many mapping methods does Unicode define?
What are the two mapping methods that Unicode defines?
What do numbers in the names of the encodings indicate? 
What are the most commonly used encodings? 
What does UCS stand for?
What does BOM stand for? 
What specifies the BOM?
what is the code point of the BOM?
What is U+UFFE the result of? 
What is the UTF-8 standard? 
Byte order marks are forbidden in protocols using what standard? 
Why is it possible to distinguish UTF-8 from other protocols?
How is UTF-32 widely used? 
What programming language uses UTF-32 as internal representation of characters? 
what version of python can be used with UTF-32? 
What combinations does unicode contain in normal use?
How is the latin small letter e represented in Unicode?
How is the accent added to the small latin e? 
What precomposed character represents the small latin e with an accent? 
The CJK ideographs comprise simpler elements called what in English?
Why have ideographs been unable to be simplified like Hangul?
What would be the benefit of Unicode decomposing  ideographs?
What does ACE stand for? 
Who created ACE?
When was ACE created? 
Who created OpenType?
Who created Graphite? 
where are instructions embedded to tell fonts how to output sequences? 
Can real stacking be accomplished? 
what is a solution to the placement of combining marks? 
What subset of Unicode is used by Windows? 
What are MES-1, MES-2, AND MES-3A AND MES-3B part of? 
What subset includes every character in MES-1 and WGL-4? 
How long has Microsoft Windows supported WGL-4? 
MES-1 uses what scripts only? 
What does rendering software display when it can't process a Unicode character? 
What is the code for the Unicode replacement character? 
What is the name of Apple's font? 
What company uses the Unicode Fallback font? 
What does SIL's Unicode Fallback font display when it can't display a character properly? 
What is the dominant scheme for internal processing? 
What is Unicode available through Windows on? 
What was the two-byte precursor to UTF-16? 
What is used almost exclusively for building new information processing systems? 
What is recommended for email transmission of Unicode? 
Where are the details of the two mechanisms for email transmission specified? 
How many different mechanisms does MIME define for encoding Unicode in email? 
How many fonts support the majority of Unicode's character repertoire? 
What are the fonts that support Unicode referred to as? 
Unicode-based fonts are normally focused on supporting what? 
What is the code for separating lines? 
What is the code for separating paragraphs? 
How is newline normalization accomplished in Mac OS X? 
How does the newliine normallization format work? 
Why has Unicode been criticized for not separately encoding forms of kanji?
What is TRON? 
What perception does the unification of glyphs cause? 
what tables of OpenType allow permit the selection of alternative glyph representations?
Where is information provided to designate which character form to select? 
How does modern font technology address the issue of depicting a Han character in alternate glyph representations? 
Unicode was designed for a round trip format conversion to and from what? 
How many encoding forms are there for Korean Hangul?
Since what version can already existing characters no longer be added to the standard? 
What kind of mappings must be provided between characters in existing legacy character sets and those in Unicode?
A lack of consistency between what earlier Japanese encodings and unicode led to mismatches?
what is the fullwidth tilde character code in Microsoft Windows?
How many code points are tamil and Devanagari allocated? 
What is another word for ligatures? 
What is the ISCII standard? 
What standard did Unicode inherit involving a Thai language? 
Why has Thai alphabet support been criticized? 
How are the Thai characters ordered incorrectly? 
How are characters with diacritical marks represented? 
What encoding does Charis SIL use? 
What is the issue with underdots and their placement? 
Characters with what marks can be displayed as a single character or a decomposed sequence? 
How should the characters with the macron and acute be displayed? 
 How does the Cambridge English Dictionary define "Culture" in short?
What is the name of this theory that culture is a series of activities and world views?
What did Homo Sapiens acquire that allowed them to become aware of Culture?
Around when were humans able to understand to some degree what culture really meant?
Name some cultural universals that exist with humans today.
What does the term "concept material culture" cover?
What was sometimes used or worn by early humans to form some type of culture visibly?
Around what time did Mass Culture emerge?
What do some schools of philosophy suggest culture is used for?
What does the term "Count Noun" mean?
What cultural traits fall under the term count noun?
What falls within the term "cultural anthropology"?
What is the modern term "culture" based on?
Who took over the metaphor used by Cicero?
Samuel changed something that was in the old meaning of the metaphor, what was it?
What changes do Social conflicts along with developing of technologies have on culture? 
What is this cultural movement called that involves a shift in gender relations mainly involving women?
Which time period was used in the example of shifts in social dynamics?
What may impact social dynamics and technical development?
In the example given, what seemed exotic when introduced into China but is common in the United States?
What does the term Stimulus diffusion mean?
Which theory consist of cultured adopting new practices,ideas, and products?
Who said the following statement? "Enlightenment is man's emergence from his self-incurred immaturity".
What does the term Sapere aude mean?
Which German scholar argued that human creativity takes diverse forms and is as important as human rationality?
Which Prussian linguist called for an anthropology?
During which ere did scholars of Germany developed a more inclusive culture?
What was the German name given for the creation of this culture during the Romantic era?
According to Bastian, what did he believe all human societies shared?
What was the name of the person argued for "The psychic unity of mankind"?
Who trained under Bastian's ideas on culture?
What did culture refer to in practice?
What was associated with culture during this German practice?
Art and music were some of these forms of  cultural related to what type of living?
The idea of culture in Europe in the 19th century reflected what during this time period?
How did Matthew Arnold view "Culture" with?
Which two philosophers contrasted "culture" with the state of nature?
Which race was considered living "in a state of nature" by the Europeans?
"In a state of nature" was divided into two groups, what where they?
What type of music did critics associate with corrupt high culture?
Which type of music seemed superficial and decadent?
What was another name used for the corrupted high culture of the indigenous people?
Who's definition of culture did anthropologist  accept?
What four fields make up American anthropology which play a vital role on its research of culture?
In which century did "culture" as a central concept of American anthropology emerge?
Who referred to culture as a cultivation of individuals?
What makes up the sociological parts of culture according to Simmel?
What does non-material culture refer to?
The term material culture is only relevant to what?
Where did sociology culture stem from?
Who was the first to refer to culture as sociology?
What do cultural  sociologist tend to reject as key attribute of culture?
Which three early theorist helped shape sociology of culture?
What were the early concerns for the field of Sociology culture?
What is most of the research into sociological culture ?
Which scientist was influenced by Marxism in the United Kingdom?
What did Marxist like Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams  they identify culture as?
What made up Leisure activities and goods as viewed by Marxist?
What led sociologist like Stuart and Raymond to focus on class relations and the organization of production?
In the U.S what does "Cultural Studies" focus largely on in this field?
Who first coined the term "Cultural Studies" in the United States?
What was the name of the company founded by Hoggart in 1964?
The CCCS has since been associated with who?
Who did Stuart Hall work along side with?
What did Stuart and his colleagues create?
In the field that Stuart was working, what did he and his colleagues often concentrate on?
Capitalism can be referred to as what process?
The idea of text in cultural studies can include what forms other than written language?
Which two practices have become the main focus in cultural studies?
What makes up cooperative cultural studies? 
Around when did the United States and United Kingdom began to develop different versions of cultural studies?
When did the British version of cultural studies emerge?
Who had influenced cultural studies in the U.K?
Which University did research of cultural studies take place under CCCS?
Which two wrote Cultural studies [were] grounded in a pragmatic, liberal-pluralist tradition?
From a Marxist view, what did they believe had to be controlled  to essentially control a culture?
How many ways did Raimon Panikkar believed cultural change can be based on?
What is the term used to describe what Modernization could be similar or related to?
What type of society was seen that came from Raimon's 29 ways?
What year was the PlayStation 3 released?
What social gaming service was integrated into the PlayStation 3?
What was the thinner version of the PS3 called?
What year did the Super Slim model hit stores?
How many PlayStation 3 units had been purchased as of early 2016?
What shape was the Sixaxis prototype in?
What event did Sony choose for the PS3 unveiling?
What popular game was demoed in a video at the game shows?
What event did Sony take the PlayStation 3 to four months after E3?
What was one game Sony debuted on a modified PC so gamers could get a look?
How many USB ports did the original PS3 prototype have?
By the time the system appeared at E3 2006, how many Ethernet ports was it down to?
Why might Sony have reduced the number of ports on the PlayStation 3 before production?
In addition to the 20 GB model, what larger model did Sony offer?
What color is the logo on the 60 GB PS3?
Which region experience a setback that pushed back the release of the PlayStation 3?
What part of the system was Sony having trouble getting supplies for?
Which Japanese PS3 model got a 20%-plus price cut before hitting the market?
Where did Sony offer the 60 GB model with an open pricing scheme?
How many playable games did the PlayStation 3 by the time it arrived at the 2006 Tokyo Game Show?
Instead of November, for what month of the following year was the release rescheduled?
What country had to wait until June of 2007 for their PS3?
How big was the hard drive in the single South Korean version?
What did customers in Singapore pay for the 60 GB PS3?
On what date did the PlayStation 3 go on sale in Africa?
What was the model number of the slim version of the PlayStation 3?
What font was discontinued with the release of the slim model?
What would customers notice about the sound of the new, improved cooling system?
What did the boot screen on the game consoles read before Sony changed it to "PS3 PlayStation 3"?
What did Sony change about the PS3 games along with the packaging in 2009?
At what event did Sony tell everyone about the CECH-4000?
What size was the largest hard drive available on the Super Slim PS3?
How many versions of the CECH-4000 were made?
On what date was the 12 GB version of the Super Slim released in the UK?
What color was the PlayStation 3 that was included in the God of War: Ascension bundle in the States?
How many games could you buy to go with your PS3 when it launched in North America?
What game won GameSpot's Game of the Year title for 2006?
What company developed the game Ridge Racer 7?
What's the name of the sequel game to MotorStorm?
How many titles did the PS3 launch with in Europe?
Which Ratchet & Clank title debuted at E3 2007?
What year was Warhawk released for the PlayStation 3?
At what event were two new Final Fantasy games for PS3 first shown to the Japanese market?
What Gran Turismo game was shown in 2007 but not released until after 2007?
Which much anticipated third-party game with the name of a month of the year in it did Sony show at E3 2007?
What's Sony's budget line of PS3 games called in Japan?
If you live in Australia and want affordable PlayStation 3 games, what range would you shop for?
What words would you see in the United States or Canada on a PS3 game that would signify its lower price?
Which Call of Duty title does Sony include in their low-end price range?
In what year was Devil May Cry 4 added to the budget game offerings for PS3?
What company said it would bring 3D technology to the PS3?
Along with Wipeout HD, what game did the press view in 3D in early 2009?
What version of firmware update gave the PlayStation 3 its 3D capability? 
What word describes what happens to a game when is edited to add functions not originally programmed?
What was the PS3 console able to play after the system software was updated to 3.50?
What operating system does Fixstars Solutions offer for the PlayStation 3?
What company sold Yellow Dog Linux before Fixstars Solutions?
What company bought RapidMind in 2009?
How many PlayStation 3 consoles was Dr. Frank Mueller able to cluster together?
Who is buying PS3 clusters instead of supercomputers in order to save some money?
What type of microprocessor is in a PS3?
What does PPE stand for?
What function is the NVIDIA RSX responsible for in a PlayStation 3?
How many Synergistic Processing Elements are in a PS3's CPU?
How much XDR DRAM is on board a PS3?
What did Sony name their vibrating PS3 controller?
At what event at the Tokyo Game Show was the DualShock 3 first announced?
What did many people who handled the DualShock 3 say it was compared to the Sixaxis?
What was the first country to be able to buy the new DualShock 3 in stores?
On what date was the DualShock three released in Australia?
How is "XrossMediaBar" abbreviated?
How many options categories display in the standard PS3 XrossMediaBar?
One of Sony's streaming services is the PlayStation Vue; what's the other one called?
When you start up your PS3, what's the first section of the PS Network you see?
What menu would you use to set up a video chat?
What does the abbreviation "NDRM" represent?
How many different PS3s can one user access?
What identifier allows a player to activate a PlayStation 3?
PlayStation has safeguards in place to prevent illegal use of what type of movies or video?
What application lets PS3 users view and organize photographs?
What version of PS3 contained Photo Gallery?
After version 3.4, Picasa was integrated into Photo Gallery along with what social networking site?
Is Photo Gallery automatically or separately installed?
Photo Gallery includes the ability to sort by age, color, or what other unusual criteria for photo software?
In what month of 2009 did VidZone start free service to some countries?
What do you have to agree to with Netflix before you can use their service on PlayStation 3?
What year did the announcement come about Netflix becoming available on PS3 in the U.S.?
What type of disc was initially used to connect access to Netflix for PS3?
When were users able to discard the disc and access Netflix directly through their PS3s?
What functionality did the PlayStation 3 lose in version 3.21 of its firmware update?
What reason did Sony give for taking out OtherOS?
Was firmware update 3.21 optional or mandatory if users wanted to continue accessing the PS Network?
Which PS3 model never included OtherOS?
What legal action did some disgruntled OtherOS users take against Sony?
What part of the original model PS3s starting causing problems in March of 2010?
What essential network were some users unable to connect to because of the error?
What erroneous date did some users start seeing on their consoles?
What humorous nickname was given to the situation with the console system clock errors?
The name "ApocalyPS3" combines "PS3" with what other word?
By what date did Sony correct the issue with the system clock?
What were the broken models mistakenly classifying 2010 as?
What storage system for dates led to the system clock error?
What clock unrelated to the error in the PS3 had to be updated in some cases in order to fix the bug?
What PS3 game can integrate a PlayStation Portable to use as a rear-view mirror?
What kind of game is Formula One Championship Edition?
If users want to download original PlayStation games, where do they go online?
Games in plain PlayStation format can be played both on the PS3 console and what other device?
What's the name of the feature that would let you play a game on your PSP without having it with you?
In what city did Sony hold their 2006 PlayStation Business Briefing?
Does PlayStation Network use artificial or real currency for purchases?
Along with being free and providing constant connectivity, what other feature does PS Network offer users?
PlayStation Network is only available for PS3 and what other device?
What's the name of Sony's exclusive PlayStation Network subscription service?
How is PlayStation Plus often abbreviated?
Who was the President and CEO of SCEA in the year 2010?
On what date did the PlayStation Plus service officially launch?
Duration options for subscription to PS+ are either three months or what period of time?
Where can you buy downloadable content for the PSP and PS3?
What do you click on in the PS3 interface to get to the PlayStation Store?
What connection would you go through to go to the PS3 store from a PSP?
How many unique downloads had there been from the PlayStation Store by late 2009?
From a PC, what application can you use to visit the PlayStation Store?
What new feature for PS3 was released in September of 2009?
At what event did Sony announce What's New?
What did What's New replace?
What type of information is disseminated through What's New?
What's geographical area does What's New tailor information to for each user?
How many  different sections does What's New have?
What section of What's New would a user visit to find the games they've played lately?
Before What's New existed, what default screen would show when a user put a movie in their PS3?
What section of What's New can't show links to websites?
Other than the Video default screen for movies, what menu would the PS3 default to before What's New?
What does Sony call their social network?
What is the customizable representation of a user in PS Home called?
Home has free, won, and what third type of content?
Users employ the content to decorate club houses, their avatars, or what virtual dwelling space?
What type of games can users find participants for in Home?
Life was able to personalize information for users by what location division?
On what date was Life with PlayStation shut down?
What's was Life's channel that delivered information about history topics?
For weather updates from The Weather Channel, which of Life's channels would you have visited?
What was the date Sony shut down the PS Network because of a security breach?
How many users did Sony say might have been affected by the intrusion?
What did Sony call the special offer they handed out to respond to the breach?
How many free days of PlayStation Plus were included in the offer?
How many free game downloads were included in the "Welcome Back" program?
What was PlayStation 3's toughest competitor in the video game market?
What did Wii offer that PS3 couldn't compete with?
In 2006, did most people prefer the Xbox 360 or PS3 versions of cross-platform games?
Until what year was Sony seeing a loss on each PlayStation 3 console it sold?
Which cost less in stores: PS3 or Wii?
How much did it cost to make one 20 GB PS3?
In contrast to the production cost, what was the retail price for a 20 GB PlayStation 3?
Assuming iSuppli got the numbers right, how much of a loss did Sony take for every 20 GB PS3 sold in the U.S.?
What was the name of Sony's President who announced his retirement amid rumors in April 2007?
In U.S. dollars, how much was the enormous loss Sony reported the month before Kutaragi's retirement announcement?
Who was Sony's CEO at the start of 2008?
When did Hirai think the PS3 might start making the company some money?
What market analyst firm said Sony could make the PlayStation 3 profitable by August 2008?
How many PS3 did Hirai set a public goal to sell by the time the product was nine?
What other Sony gaming console was Hirai setting his sales goal to beat?
Along with a drop in the cost of hardware, PS3 has gotten cheaper to make because what chip was phased out?
What's the name of the microprocessor produced by the 65 nm process?
What specific component of Blu-Ray disc have also gotten less expensive to make?
As of Summer 2009, what was the cost to Sony to make a PS3?
The August 2009 cost is a result of what percentage decrease in production cost?
What rating did Ars Technica initially give PlayStation 3?
What PS3 competitor won IGN's "Console Showdown" in 2010?
What PC Mag. staffer picked PS3 over Xbox in June, 2012? 
Which publication called the PlayStation 3 "a brilliant games console"?
Where did IGN place the PS3 on their 2009 list of the best video game consoles ever?
What list by PC World ranked PlayStation eighth, in a bad way?
What gaming website called PS3 "a hate object reviled by the entire internet"?
What quote sums up PC World's 2006 assessment of PS3?
How long did GamesRadar say it took Sony to turn the Internet against the PlayStation 3?
In what year did Gabe Newell call the PS3 "a total disaster"?
Who is Valve's VP of Marketing who says they want to hire programmers for a PS3 team?
What year did Newell show up at Sony's EC3 press conference to take back what he said about PS3?
What game did Valve develop for the PlayStation 3 console?
What's the name of Valve's software update system?
What group does Bobby Kotick think is being discouraged from working on the PS3?
What does "ROIC" stand for?
What company is Kotick the CEO of?
What newspaper reported Kotick's concerns and his threat to stop supporting the PlayStation platform?
What game development company completely disagreed with Kotick's statements in The Times interview?
What score did CNET give the PS3 out of ten?
What PlayStation 3 feature did Home Theater Magazine most like about PS3?
Have reviews praised the PS3's hardware of software more frequently?
What other reviewer agreed with Home Theater Magazine's assessment of the PS3's Blu-ray player?
What website said the PlayStation 3 "lives up to the hype"? 
With a day of its release, on what website did the PS3 Slim become the number-one bestseller?
For how many consecutive days did the PS3 Slim hold the number-one spot on Amazon.com?
What score did the PS3 Slim earn from PC World?
PC World's rave review of the PS3 Slim was a complete turnaround from their thoughts on what older model console?
Along with the PS Slim's value, quietness, and lower power usage, what superficial quality did PC World praise?
What aspect of the PS3 Slim was CNET unhappy was missing for PS2 games?
How many of five possible stars did CNET give the PS3 Slim?
How many of its own five stars did TechRadar award the PS3 Slim?
What area of the console did TechRadar feel was designed poorly compared to the original PS3?
What quality of the PS3 Super Slim was the website Spong excited about?
In addition to quieter fans and drive, what change from the other models did Spong praise?
What piece of the PS3 Super Slim's hardware did Spong say was too "fiddly"?
What did Spong said you have to do to the disc loader before the console will start reading the disc?
What website rated the Super Slim four out of five stars?
What adjective did CNET use to describe the PS3 Super Slim's design?
What component of the Super Slim did CNET call "the easiest yet"?
What hardware component did CNET have the biggest problem with, even comparing it to an old credit card reader?
Was the lowest-priced Super Slim more or less expensive than any of the PS3 Slim models?
What magazine described the Super Slim as "nostalgic"?
What PlayStation 3 model did T3 feel the Super Slim's design was paying homage to?
According to T3, what was the main differentiator between the "fat" PS3 and the Super Slim?
What hardware element did T3 feel might have issues with durability? 
T3 felt Sony was saying goodbye to past models in preparation for what next-generation console?
What is the purpose of testing software?
Why is it so difficult to locate bugs in software?
What can come from one bug being fixed?
What can testing not completely find?
While looking for bugs, what else can testing do?
What does the software compare during testing against?
What make up the oracle during testing?
What is the primamry reason for testing software?
What can testing software not fully completely establish?
What does the scope of testing the software also look at?
Which two teams would you normally separate when writing and testing software?
What is the first step that leads to a software failure?
What is the result of the programmer making a mistake?
When can software defects in dead code cause problems?
What is the primary issue with running software testing?
What types of software bugs are difficult to find during testing?
What other non-functional dimensions can cause software to underperform and cause other problems?
Although software developers are unable to test everything, what do they run to keep the testing to a minimum? 
What does the use of combinatorial testing consist of?
What two types of testing are involved with combinatorial testing as mentioned here?
What determines the cost of fixing a bug?
Ho many more times would the cost be if the problem is found after the software's release?
What could possibly lessen the cost of fixing buggy software?
Name three approaches software testers take when testing their software?
What is the term that is used to described executing programmed code with a given set of test?
When can dynamic testing occur?
What are commonly used techniques during dynamic testing?
What is another term used for White-box testing?
What is involved with White-box testing?
Which two procedures are used to design test cases in White-box testing?
What is the main difference between black-box testing and white-box testing?
What are the software testers aware of?
What are the first three methods mentioned that make up black-box testing??
What term is used to test functionality of the software accordingly with the application requirements?
What are the test cases built around?
When building test cases which of the two methods used is more common over the other?
What is one huge advantage to using the black-box method?
What can black-box testing sometimes be referred to with the in-ability to see the code?
What is a good reason to have testers and developers separate?
What does grey-box testing involve?
What does a grey-box tester not need to run their test?
What does not qualify as grey-box testing?
What does a grey-box tester implement when they have limited information?
What dopes a typical grey-box tester sets up?
What does the tester execute while performing certain actions?
What are the four recognized levels of testing software?
What are these test (level testing) typically grouped by?
What is defined in the SWEBOK guide as to testing the main levels?
What are the other levels classified by?
What is the main reasoning behind Unit testing that involves synchronization of the application on a broad spectrum? 
Who performs the Unit testing phase?
What does Unit testing look to eliminate?
By elimination construction errors, what is the expected end result?
What is it called to check data passed between units?
What is it called when data is being passed?
What is an option  of component interface testing  used while sending message packets?
What is a variation of black-box testing?
What is the term used to test software during a pre-release?
What does Operational Acceptance focus on?
What is Operational Acceptance limited to while testing?
What is the most common reason for software failure?
What do developers commonly do when creating software that can lead to failures?
What is the most common cause for software failure?
What often lacks in software developed when its released that can eventually lead to errors?
What does backwards compatibility always seem to be the cause of errors and bugs after a release?
Finding defects once a change in code had already happened is called?
What happens to software after a major change in code that leads to regression??
What is a common method used during regression testing?
What determines how deep a tester will go during regression?
If changes need to occur during the softwares early release with regression testing how much of an impact does this have on the team as related to other testing? 
What typically comes after the Alpha stage in the development and testing of software?
To whom is the beta testing released to?
What is it called when a public test continues indefinitely?
What method is used to cause a system to fail?
What does Destructive testing verify?
What is one example of failure testing?
What method is used to test software under a specific load?
What two methods can be used when using Load Testing?
What is called to test software functions when certain components increase in side?
What is Stable testing also called?
What method is used to test components under unexpected workloads?
What method is used that involves synchronization of a application?
When is development testing used?
What does Development testing look to eliminate?
Which two current movements adhere to the "test-driven software development"?
Under the development of agile software and extreme programing what is written first?
What is the goal of Unit testing?
What three components make up Bottom Up Testing?
Bottom Up Testing helps facilitate the testing of what?
What does Bottom Up Testing also help with once the process has been repeated over and over again at all levels?
If the number of states is unknown, what group does this fall into?
There are three classes, what has been concluded and proven for all classes?
If the number of states are unknown and the finite state of the machine is failing for a single trace, which group does this fall into?
With several certifications out there that can be aquired, what is the one trait they all share?
What has the inability for the applicant to show how well they test led to?
What four traits can a certification not measure?
What makes up part of the SQA?
What is the primary concern for the software specialist and auditors?
What type of software would have a better defect tolerance?
What drives the wider acceptance of renewable energy technologies?
Denmark has a committment to 100 percent renewable energy by what year?
How many countries now have renewable energy policies?
How much was the total investment in renewable energy in 2012?
Why did the total investment in renewable energy go down in 2012?
What  six were the top countries for investment in recent years?
Who has shown support for ambitious renewable energy goals?
What group polled the 27 EU member states in 2010?
The goal was to increase the share of renewable energy in the EU by 20 percent in what year?
By the end of 2011, total renewable power capacity worldwide exceeded what number?
Renewables contributed what percentage to our energy consumption?
Renewables contributed what percentage to our electricity generation?
Who was the UN under-secretary in 2011?
Between what years did worldwide renewable energy capacity grow at rates of 10 to 60 percent annually?
Who is Achim Steiner?
Which group projected that solar plant may produce most of the world's electricity within 50 years?
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet most of the world's demand for electricity by what year?
Photovoltaic and solar-thermal plants may meet how much of the world's energy needs by 2060?
Who led the world in renewable energy production in 2013?
Since what year has production of solar cells in China expanded 100-fold?
What is the main driver of reduced costs?
What is getting cheaper as a result of technilogical change?
As of what year have there been substantial reductions in the cost of solar and wind technologies?
What group stated that "cost reductions in critical technologies, such as wind and solar, are set to continue?"
What is the most economic solution for new grid-connected capacity in areas with good resources?
What happens as the scope of economically viable applications increases?
What are now often the most economic solution for new generating capacity?
What is one problem with biomass?
What can be economically competetive but may still require deployment support?
What is a fully maturing technology which offer a ready disposal mechanismm?
What is the term referring to electricity generated by hydropower?
What is the most widely used form of renewable energy?
Hydroelectricity accounts for what percentage of global electricity generation?
Electricity production is expected to increase by what percentage each year for the next 25 years?
Hydropower is produced in how many countries?
Which country is the largest hydroelectricity producer?
What is the average cost of electricity from a hydro plant larger than 10 megawatts?
How many hydroelectricity plants are larger than 10 GW?
What was the geothermal capacity in 1975?
What was the geothermal capacity in 2008?
In the Phillipines, geothermal represented what percentage of the total power mix at the end of 2008?
Where have the majority of photovoltaic power stations been built?
Where is Charanka Solar Park?
Where is the Agua Caliente Solar Project located?
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm currently under construction?
Where is Desert Sunlight Solar Farm?
Who is building The Califoria Valley Solar Ranch?
Global wind power installations increased by how much in 2010?
China has how much wind power installed?
In Denmark, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
In Spain, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
In Germany, wind power accounts for what percentage of electricity generated?
How is the wind industry in the USA able to produce more power at lower cost?
How tall are new wind turbines that are being built in Indiana, Michigan and Ohio?
Wind turbines in the USA can now compete with what type of fuel?
Prices have fallen as low as what price?
Where is the Ivanpah Solar Power Facility located?
What is the world's largest solar-thermal power plant project currently under construction?
Where is the PS20 solar power tower located?
Nearly all gasoline sold in the U.S. is mixed with what percentage of ethanol?
What act calls for 7.5 billion US gallons of biofuels to be used annually by 2012?
Name one company that sells flexible-fuel cars?
What can be made from plant matter composed primarily of inedible celllose fibers thta form the stems and branches of most plants?
What are potential sources of cellulosic biomass?
What is a promising cellulose source that can be sustainably produced in many regions?
As of 2008, geothermal power development was underway in more than how many countries?
What is one new technology attributed to the growth of geothermal power?
What is operational in the USA, Australia, Germany, France and The United Kingdom?
The PV industry has seen drops in module prices since what year?
What is a sign that further price reductions are likely in coming years?
What cost is often regarded as marking the achievment of grid parity for PV?
Why do utility operators often reject renewable resources?
Why do consumers often ignore renewable power systems?
Who argued that some of the problems facing renewable energy are more about culture and institutions than engineering and science?
Lester Brown states that the market does not incorporate what?
Who believes that the market does not value nature's service adequately?
What can help over come the problems with the market?
What involves lowering income taxes while raising levies?
Several Western European companies are shifting taxes in a process known as what?
What is the purpose of tax shifting?
Besides tax shifting, what is another need?
What was the result of publicly funded links among computers in government labs and reserach institutes?
What helped create the modern wind power industry?
As of 2012, what accounts for about half of new nameplate electrical capacity?
What involves the deployment of three generations of renewable energy technologies dating back more than 100 years?
Name one second-generation technology that is market ready.
What group advocates leveling the playing field?
How does the International Solar Energy Society propse to level the playing field?
What is the key to stabilizing the earth's climate?
What country is reducing its coal subsidy?
What country has been increasing its support for the fossil fuel and nuclear industries?
Some countries have phased out all subsidies for what substance?
Setting national renewable energy targets can be an important part of what?
The European Union has prescribed an indicative renewable energy target of what percent?
Name one outher country with defined national or regional target?
What determines the extent to which renewable energy is to be incorporated into a country's generation mix?
Who has the authority to carry out a number of functions that havae implications for the feasiblity of renewable energy projects?
Why have energy sector regulators become a key facilitator of renewable energy investments?
What is the driving force behind voluntary green electricity within the EU?
What states that EU Member States must ensure that the origin of electricity produced from renewables can be guaranteed?
In the US, what is the main tool to track and stimulate voluntary actions?
What made a strong economic case for investing in low carbon technologies?
In what year did a number of events push renewable energy up the political agenda?
What is driving increasing rates of investment in the renewable energy industry?
What helped the industry weather the 2009 economic crisis better than other sectors?
What suggests that the commercialization of clean energy will hellp countries deal with economic malaise?
Which company became invovled in a political controversy?
What company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy?
What plays a major role in the energy mix of many countries?
What is becoming increasingly economic in both developing and devloped countries?
As of 2012, prices for what commodity continued to drop?
Who is United Nations' Secretary-General?
Ban Ki-moon states that renewable energy has the ability to lift the poorest nations to new levels of prosperity?
Who is chair of UN Energy?
Who is chairman of Bank of America?
In 2012, solar electricity consumption increased by what percentage?
Use of wind power in 2012 increased by what percentage?
How much was the worldwide investment in solar power in 2012?
Analysts expect the market to triple by what year?
In what year did investment in renewables exceed fossils?
What motivated the incentive to use 100 percent renewable energy?
How many nations already have renewable energy contributing to more than 20 percent of energy supply?
Who developed a series of stabilization wedges?
Who is a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Stanford University?
What is a barrier to implementing the renewable energy plan?
Who stated that energy costs with a wind, solar, water system should be similar to today's energy costs?
Jacobson says producing all new energy with wind power, solar power and hydropower is feasible by what year?
Why is renewable energy an attractive option?
In what country is the National Research Council located?
Sufficient domestic reneewable resources exist for what reason?
What makes up Education?
What methods make up Education?
Where does education usually take place under?
What occurred after the Fall of Rome with literature?
What happened with education  during the Early Middle Ages?
What did these early schools during the Middle Ages evolve into?
What was the name of the famous school during the high middle ages?
Where does formal education take place?
What are some of the sets or ideals most school systems follow?
Who guides the students in a formal environment?
Whats the typical age range for pre-school?
What are pre-schools also known as?
In what country is Kindergarten a term used for primary education?
What is another term used for Primary education?
What does primary school consist of?
What is the name of the orgination who is striving to get all the countries on the same path with primary education?
What does secondary education comprise of?
What two examples were given of what "postsecondary" or "higher" education?
When does secondary schooling typically take place?
What is the purpose of secondary education?
When did secondary education emerge in the United States?
Why was secondary school introduced in the U.S?
Who benefited from secondary schools?
What was another name used for Higher Education?
What is High Education?
What does Tertiary education include?
What does University education include?
What are usually Universities made up of?
What type of University would Yale fall under?
What was a rule for disabled people in the past for education?
Who denied children with disabilities to be unable to attend a public school?
Who were some of these early physicians?
What would Special Education usually only apply to in the early years of schooling in the U.S?
What is another term used for Special Education Services?
When were public schools become more and more developed?
What are some examples of alternative schools?
Whos educatgion approach was introduced in Germany in the 19th century and is used in most Kindergartens?
Who from Switzerland was an influential in education?
Who were the founders of progressive education?
What makes up Indigenous education?
In which two systems can Indigenous education be used?
What is one of the main purposes for Indigenous education?
Who defines informal learning?
Where does informal learning occur?
What does informal leaning usually consist of amongst people who take this route of learning?
Where does informal learning usually take place?
What is not necessary for informal learning?
What falls under the informal learning umbrella?
When was the 'education through recreation" applied to childhood?
When was the concept of 'education through recreation' changed and expanded?
What changed when the concept was broadened?
What does Auto didacticism generally mean?
When can you become an Autodidact?
Which famous U.S president was a Autodidact?
Which famous inventor was a Autodidact?
In what year did e-learning jump 14 times over traditional leaning?
Which form of education looks to be the dominant form i the coming years?
What has been a constant issue with education for as long as education has been around itself?
Which type of schooling can be most expensive?
What is not as common in open education?
Which University offers conventional degrees? 
What do most open education sources offer?
What does Universal Primary Education belong to?
What is one issue that hurts Universal Primary Education?
Which organization has discovered corruption in the educator sector?
What has come from similarities in systems?
Which programfacilitates the exchange students across Europe?
Which group provides opportunities for Eastern Europe and Asia exchange students?
What does LCPS stand for?
What was the reason for the polarisation for affordable schooling?
Where are these types of school spreading across?
What are some of the claims being pointed towards education inequality?
Who do students often blame for their education short comings?
What happens when someone tries to improve education?
What is the discrepancy between Developed and less developed countries?
What resources do developed countries have better access to?
What is common in developed countries?
What is one good trait about students from developed countries?
What use of technology can greatly supplement how teachers teach in the classroom?
What do students also need occasionally before putting blame on teachers?
What is the meaning of Education psychology?
What is also used interchangeably  with Education psychology?
Who are likely to be identified as educational psychologist?
What is educational psychology concerned with?
How can Educational psychology in part be understood?
How is the method of educational psychology have some relation to medicine and biology?
Where does education psychology draw from?
In universities where are the departments of educational psychology normally held?
What is important for a student in education?
What does education increase in a student?
What is intelligence at 53 more closely related to?
Who focused on identifying stimuli that can influence learning?
Who also along with Dunn recommended other teaching studies?
Who created the Type Delineator?
What do some theories believe?
What should be included in effective teaching?
What can Philosophy education be when we talk about the process?
What defines Philosophy education?
What fields make up field education and a field applied philosophy?
What is another term used for instructors?
What are the main subjects that are covered by the instructor?
In the United States what is considered the single most important factor in a child's education?
What is the theory behind Empirical analyses?
What has been argued about high rates in education?
What is greatly needed with technology transfer when it relates to education?
Literature on how earnings and how it relates to schooling was greatly influenced by who?
This view of how schooling and earnings has sparked a lot of studies, but what else has it brought up?
What was one of the main concerns of this literature on how schooling and earnings?
Which North American version of football calls for 12 player per side on the field?
How many yards wider is a Canadian football field than an American football field?
Which version of North American football has smaller end zones?
How many downs does a team have to advance ten yards in Canadian football?
How far away from the line of scrimmage must Canadian football defenders be?
On which date was the Canadian Junior Football League formed?
How old are the players in the Quebec Junior Football League?
What trophy is awarded to the winner of Canadian inter-university football competition?
What institution memorializes great Canadian football achievements?
On which date was the first Canadian football game for which a written record has survived?
Which team won the first recorded Canadian football game?
What is the oldest football club in Canada?
Which founder of Milton, MA also helped develop the rules of Canadian football?
What was the first final score recorded of a Canadian football game?
On which date was the first governing body for Canadian football formed?
Which governing organization for Canadian football was formed on June 12, 1880?
In which year was the Western Interprovincial Football Union founded?
Which Canadian football union expanded its scope in 1891? 
Which organization founded in 1956 evolved into the modern Canadian Football League?
Which Canadian football rules did the ORFU adopt in 1903?
Which three Canadian football unions resisted the Burnside Rules?
In which year did forward passes become acceptable in Canadian football?
Which style of North American football changed the rules of their game the most from their earliest versions?
Who donated a championship trophy for Canadian football teams in 1909?
When did professional teams begin to dominate the Canadian football championship?
Which trophy was awarded to a Canadian football champion beginning in 1909?
Which was the last amateur team to compete for the Canadian football championship?
What government position was held by the man who donated the Grey Cup to Canadian football?
Which one country besides Canada has hosted a professional Canadian football game?
In which year did the CFL first attempt an expansion into the United States?
Which American CFL team won the Grey Cup?
The return of an NFL team to which city contributed to the demise of the CFL's American expansion?
How many years did the CFL South Division last?
Which organization oversees amateur Canadian football?
How many football teams compete in Canadian Interuniversity Sport?
Which trophy goes to the Canadian Interuniversity Sport football champion?
What is the name of the championship game for junior Canadian football teams?
Which provinces field teams in the Quebec Junior Football League?
How many yards wide is a Canadian football field?
How long in meters is the crossbar of a Canadian football goal?
What part of a Canadian football field was sometimes marked with a "G"?
What distance from the sidelines are hash marks painted on a CFL field?
Which team calls heads or tails in the coin flip before a CFL game?
Who on a football team articulates the team's decision following the coin flip?
What can the team that wins the coin toss choose besides whether they wish to kick off or receive the ball?
Who makes a choice after the team that wins the coin toss has made their decision?
What is the term for play stopped because the ball carrier, although not fully tackled, can no longer advance the ball?
Where does the next play start unless a team has just scored?
Which parts of the ball carrier's body do not cause play to stop when they touch the ground?
Which direction of pass causes play to stop when it is not caught?
What minimum distance from the sideline does the official place the ball before play starts?
What is the term for the line across the field where the ball is positioned before a play?
How many players must the team with possession place near the line of scrimmage?
How close to the line of scrimmage can defensive players approach before a play is run?
How many players does each side field in an American football game?
What is the term for the team who begins a play with control of the ball?
What is the initial backward movement of the ball in a play called?
Which two players most commonly receive the first backward pass in a football play?
What is another term for a completed play?
How many plays can the offence run without gaining ten yards?
What does a team do when they have not advance the ball enough to score or likely gain a new set of downs?
How many downs does a team get after they've gained ten on their first down?
What is the term for the player that is currently handing the football when play is underway?
Within what distance from the line of scrimmage can offensive players who do not have the ball be legally contacted by defensive players?
What are two illegal ways to block an opposing player's progress near the line of scrimmage?
Which player may not be tackled immediately after they have thrown a pass?
What is the usual penalty when the rules of play are violated?
How many yards does a team lose when they commit a minor penalty?
How many yards does a team lose for face-masking?
What other than yardage is sometimes awarded the offence on a defensive penalty?
Where is the ball placed when a defensive penalty is committed in their own end zone?
In which North American style of football is the line of scrimmage never inside the one-yard line?
A play that results in what outcome will never also be a scoring play?
How many penalty yards are awarded when the ball is nearer the goal line than the usual penalty yardage?
Who can decline a penalty?
A team receiving a punt cannot decline a penalty on which down?
The outcome of which play determines the placement of the ball when a penalty is declined?
What can a team do when they prefer the original outcome of a play to the situation they would have with a penalty assessed on the other team for that play?
At which point in a game is the time the offence takes to put the ball in play measured?
How many seconds elapse before a time count penalty is assessed?
What is the penalty for a time count on the first two downs?
Who can turn the ball over to the other side if an offensive team incurs too many time count violations?
How many yards does the offense lose for a time count on third down?
What happens to a quarter whose time expires while the ball is still live in play?
Which plays do not cause time to run off the clock during the final minutes of a half?
What causes a quarter to be extended one additional play even if time has run out?
How long is a quarter in minutes?
What determines which team gets possession first when extending a game to break a tie?
At which yard line on their opponent's side does a team take possession of the ball according to the CFL's tie-breaking rules?
In which year did the CFL begin requiring teams to attempt 2-point conversions after scoring in a tie-breaking situation?
Which round of tie-breaking is the last possible round in a regular season CFL game?
Which CFL games require tie-breaking rounds continue until a winner results?
Red is opposite what color of the spectrum?
Which two colors besides red make up the RGB color system?
Which color is red next to on the spectrum of visible light?
How many nanometres does red have?
Which colors are combined to make all other colors? 
What spectrum of light is red within?
Which color is opposite of red on the visible spectrum?
On the spectrum of light, where is red found?
What color is beside red in the visible spectrum of light?
Red Yellow and Blue are what kind of colors?
From where does the color red in blood come from?
What does hemoglobin contain?
What causes the color of hematite and red ochre?
Why does a sky turn red when the evening comes?
What pigment is responsible for the color of leaves in fall?
During what period did people use Kermes vermilio to make red dye?
What does Kermes vermilio eat to survive?
From where did Romans acquire Kermes?
What kind of bural was at Adaoutse, Bouches-du-Rhne?
What was the earliest known writing about dye from Aermenian cochineal?
In which book of the Bible did God reference gifts of Blue Purple and Scarlet?
What does coccumque bis tinctum translate to in english?
In ancient greek, what is coccus referred to as?
What does Kokkos mean in english?
In what century did the latin vulgate bible use the term coccumque bis tinctum?
When did Egyptians start to make red pigment?
What pigment was used for male skin tone in ancient wall art?
What root did Egyptians use to source their red pigment alizarin?
What dye did the Egyptians make using the madder plant?
What type of palette was found in Tutankhamun's tomb?
Which color was said to be the Emperor's color in ancient Rome?
At what time were togas with red were worn by Romans?
What is a flammeum?
What color was correlated with the Army in ancient Rome?
After what event would a general of the Roman army be painted red?
What pigment was used to paint villas in ancient Rome?
From where did vermilion originate?
Cinnabar is an ore of what metal?
What mines did Romans use to acquire cinnabar?
Along with slaves, who was sent to work in cinnabar mines in Rome?
Which European emperor painted their palace red?
In what year did cardinals in the Roman Catholic church start wearing red?
When was Saint Denis Basilica rebuilt?
Who rebuilt the basilica of Saint Denis?
Christ and which other Christian figure were often painted red in medieval painting?
What status did the wearing of red in medieval times represent?
On what occasion would townspeople wear red?
What root was used for red clothing owned by commoners?
Outside of sun exposure in what circumstance did pigment made from rubia tinctorum fade?
What was carmine made from?
How many elements did the Chinese philosophers think the world was made of?
What element was red associated with in Chinese philosophy?
Outside of Fire and Earth, what three other elements did Chinese philosophers say the world was composed from?
At the time of the Han dynasty where would one fine the color Red?
In the time of the Ming Dynasty one would find what color used during sacrificial offerings?
During what years did the Song dynasty occur?
Which number of ranks wore purple clothing in the Song dynasty?
What color did sixth rank Song dynasty officials wear?
What ranks in the Song dynasty wore blue?
Who painted their mansions red during the Song and Tang dynasties?
who wrote A dream of Red Mansions?
During what years was Cao Xueqin alive?
In late Chinese dynasties red was used only on what kind of architecture?
Who painted the walls of the Forbidden city red after the fall of the Ming dynasty?
What plant was used to make the most used red dye in Venice?
Which group in Europe used Kermes dye?
The wealthiest in Europe used what red dye?
What dye was known as the Blood of Saint John?
The Blood of Saint John was made from an insect, which one?
Which conquistador from Spain conquered the Aztec Empire?
In what century did a new kind of red pigment arrive in Europe from the Aztec Empire?
During what years was the Aztec Empire conquered?
In what year did Cortes send the first cochineal to Spain?
How often could the Mexican cochineal be harvested?
What did Renaissance painters call the pigment made from cochineal?
What would to the carmine pigment if not used diligently?
What was madder lake made from?
During what century did carmine start to see use?
What was kermes lake made from?
During which revolution was red a symbol of liberty?
What kind of cap did the Jacobins wear?
Women with red caps crowded around guillotines during the Reign of Terror to do what?
During what years did the Reign of Terror take place?
Who was Saint Denis?
What was Turkey red called in France?
In what years did Turkey red begin to be used to dye cotton in England?
What other pigment was Turkey red compared to?
What did turkey red get its color from?
In what century did quilts in America commonly use Turkey red?
In which century did color theory begin to be systematically studied?
Who painted the Night Cafe?
In what year was The Night Cafe painted?
What was the name of vincent van Gogh's brother?
What occurred when red and green were put next to one another?
During which century did Matisse work?
Placing red and green next to each other causes their color to be what?
What color did Matisse claim would impact ones blood pressure?
What color did Matisse say could penetate ones soul?
What part in the paintings of Matisse did color play?
To whom did Rothko donate Passion of Christ murals?
In what year did Rothko donate Passion of Christ murals?
What organic reds did Rothko use in the Passion of Christ murals?
In what year had the Passion of Christ murals by Rothko end up ruined?
What was the result of the change in color in the Rothko Passion of the Christ murals?
What was red ochre composed of?
How were pigments like red lake created?
What was red lake composed of?
What was the source of color in Red lac?
The Laccifer lacca was crucial to making what pigment?
Which colors are part of the RGB model?
What color light is created when one mixes red, green, and blue?
The RGB color model has three colors in it that are described as what kind of colors?
Which era did Cennino Cennini actively paint in?
What colors are used to create purple on a computer screen?
Over what numerical scale is color measured on a computer screen?
What is the total number of possible sRGB colors?
What is the number used to indicate pure red in sRGB?
Crimson is identified by what sRGB number?
What type of scattering is responsible for the shift in the color of sunlight?
What occurs to colors of short wavelengths in Rayleigh scattering?
What is the effect on blue and green light experiencing Rayleigh scattering during sunrise?
In comparison to blue and green, what would describe the wavelength of orange or red light?
When was the first ruby laser invented?
In what year did a red helium-neon laser come to be?
What type of laser is used in a LaserDisc player?
What type of laser diode is used in a DVD player?
What type of laser is used in Raman spectroscopy?
At which period of the year are phosphates high?
What causes sugar created by chlorophyll to breakdown?
Where does phosphate within a leaf move in the fall?
What is created in fall when phosphates retreat to the stems of plants?
What occurs in bright light to leaves during fall?
What pigment accounts for the majority of color in red hair?
There is another part of the face which gets its red color from the pigment pheomelanin, what is it?
Aside from pheomelanin what color pigment contributes to red hair?
In what year can the earliest used of redhead be traced to?
What type of temper are people with red hair considered to have?
In alpha male mandrills what party of the body is most red according to their rank?
Wearing red is connected to what result in humans, in terms of sport?
In what sport have judges been shown to favor athletes wearing red?
What is the effect of exposing a human to red when it comes to cognitive skills?
The amount of red in mandrill males is directly related to levels of what?
What trait do people most commonly link red with?
Why did the Popes of the middle ages wear red?
What was depicted on the banners of Christians in the First crusade?
What is the cross on the banners used during the First Crusade known as?
Who was Saint George believed to be?
When was Saint Valentine martyred?
Who was Saint Valentine?
In which century did Saint Valentine's day become connected with lovers?
In what kind of countries is the celebration of Valentine's day forbidden?
Which nation forbade the sale of Valentine's Day products in 2002 and 2011?
What color gowns are generally worn by recent Doctors of Philosophy at Oxford?
What good traits is the color red associated with in China?
In what century did Saint Nicholas become the influence for red being worn by Santa Claus?
Who was Saint Nicholas?
In what nation is Myra?
What did a red flag signal in the Middle Ages?
What was the importance of a red flag flown by a warship in the Middle Ages?
Which British law forbade cars from following a bearer of a red flag as a warning to horse drawn vehicles?
Under what circimstance is a red flag flown in auto racing?
What is a football player shown before being ejected from a match?
In what city did the standardization of red as a color of stop lights occur?
In what year did nations standardize on red as a color for stop lights?
At what event did the color red become the standard color of stop lights?
Red is the color of stoplights due to its universal affiliation with what?
At what time is red at its brightest?
In what way is red used in contemporary fashion?
What is the main impact of people wearing red as it relates to the perception of distance?
Why do monarchs sometimes wear red?
Some professions require employees to wear red because it allows them to be what?
How many heads did the scarlet beast which a woman sat on have?
The horned scarlet beast that a woman sat on had how many horns?
What kind of cup did the woman on the scarlet horned beast have?
What was on the forehead of the woman on the scarlet horned beast?
Outside of the blood of the saints, on what did the woman on the scarlet horned beast become drunken?
Which cardinal direction is signified by red in China?
What season is red identified with in China?
Red paper is used to wrap gifts of money during what special celebration in China?
Who wrote the Little Red Book?
In what year was the Little Red Book published?
What central African warriors are said to cover themselves in red for celebrations?
What does the Ndembu culture believe red symbolizes?
What color do the Ndembu believe is better than red?
What alternative colors does the Red Cross use in certain parts of Africa?
What team did the Cincinnati Red Stockings become?
When did the Cincinnati Red Stockings come to be?
What political movment was red identified with in the 1950s?
What name did the Cincinnati Red Stockings become known as for a time in the 1950s?
Where did the Cincinnati Red Stockings move after leaving Cincinnati?
What color jersey does Bayern Munich wear?
What is the nickname given to A.C. Milan?
What has to occur for a player in association football to be shown a red penalty card?
What occurs when a player in association football is shown a red penalty card?
How is an association football team impacted when a player is shown a red penalty card?
In Christian nations what does the color red often become associated with?
What cross is on the British flag?
As it relates to England, who is Saint George?
Which US armed force uses red as the main color of its flag?
In terms of a beach, why might one see a red flag?
When did the Slavic solidarity movement choose red blue and white as their colors?
In what year did the nation of George get a new national flag?
What is in the middle of the Georgian flag?
How many small crosses are on the Georgian flag?
What were the Pan-Slavic colors originally?
During what time period did the German Empire use the colors red white and black?
What did red white and black become associated with in Germany?
Whose design was the Nazi flag?
In what era did red white and black become part of the Nazi flag?
Red was chosen as part of the Nazi flag to do what?
After the demise of what was the red flag linked to the French Revolution?
On what date was the Garde Nationale empowered to hoist a red flag to signal their intervention in a riot?
On what date did the Garde Nationale kill as many as fifty people on Champs de Mars?
Who wrote the words "Against us they have raised the bloody flag of tyranny?"
In what year did the most ardent revolutionaries in France adopt a red flag to symbolize the blood of their fallen comrades?
When was the Communist Manifesto first created?
Who wrote the Communist Manifesto?
The French Revolution resulted in the fall of which monarch?
When did the 19th century workers of Paris construct barricades and hoist red flags to protest their new government?
Who was tasked with stopping the late 19th century worker uprisings in France?
Who was defeated in the Franco-Prussian war?
After Paris was seized as a result of the Franco-Prussian war, what did revolutionaries and workers create?
For how long did the Paris Commune exist?
Next to whom was a a Paris Commune banner placed?
In what year did people of the French Communist party go to Moscow to give the Soviet government a Paris Commune banner?
How many days did the recount after the 2000 US election last for?
In the USA red states are known to do what, in terms of politics?
In what year did the concept of red and blue states become relatively fixed?
In the United States states that vote for Democratic presidential candidates are known as what?
In what year was the Community Party of China created?
The Community Party of China gained power in China, what year did it happen?
Who was the Party leader of the Communist Party of China when it took power?
In terms of the Communist Party of China, what is "The East is Red?"
How many members does the contemporary Communist Part of China have?
What did the biggest star on the flag of China in 1949 represent?
What does the red color in the Nepalese flag represent?
In the mid 20th century the flag of Laos was primarily what color?
Which group gained power in China in 1949?
In what year during the 20th century did the Chinese flag become red?
What does DBMS stand for?
What is the purpose of a DBMS?
What is the most popular DBMS?
How are DBMSs classified?
How is data accessed?
How much data can a DBMS store?
A DBMS consists of what?
What do most database applications contain?
What is used to recover data if disks suffer a failure?
How can large quantities of data be accessed?
What is required for a modern DBMS to function?
How long can it take to create a DBMS?
Name three DBMSs that have been used since the 1970s.
How is the cost to create a DBMS distributed?
Name an example of a general-purpose DBMS.
How are many databases accessed?
How do administrators work with the DBMS?
What is a way for programmers to use the DBMS?
Who created the relational model of DBMS?
Instead of using links, how was information found in a relational model?
In what decade did computer hardware become able to handle a relational system?
What type of system in still prominent to this day?
What database language is the most prominent?
Why was COBOL created?
When were DBMSs first used commercially?
When was the standard protocol completed?
What group discovered COBOL?
What was the standard protocol called?
What was the DBMS created by IBM called?
What was the purpose of the IBM DBMS?
What is the classification of IMS?
What was the name of Bachman's Turing Award presentation in 1973?
Who proposed using a table to store data?
How is data accessed in a table?
What model solved the problem of databases where information was missing?
What system assists a user in seeing a table?
How was the relational model able to improve over time?
What is the relationship called in a hierarchical model?
What is the relationship called in a navigational model?
What is a third type of model that can be combined with heirarchical and navigation models?
How is information stored in a navigational system?
How is a database system frequently used?
How is information stored in a relational system?
What happens to blank data fields in a navigational system?
What is a key used for?
What technique is used to collect into one place?
How is information accessed in a relational model?
How is data in an optional table accessed?
How does a program collect information using a navigational system?
What is used to solve the problem of looping?
What computer language came about as a result of the looping problem?
What type of math was used to create a system to find data sets?
Who used tuple calculus to show the functionality of databases?
Who used Codd's paper at Berkeley to improve a geographical database?
What was the name of the project to create a geographical database?
When was INGRES first tested?
What computer language was used in INGRES to access data?
Is QUEL still used to access data in INGRES?
What is a CAFS accelerator?
Did the CAFS accelerator work as planned?
How are today's database systems run?
Name a company that is still working on the CAFS accellerator?
What is the system IBM created using Codd's research?
When was IBM's system released?
What did System R work on to change the way data was stored?
When customers first tested IBM's system, what computer language had been added? 
What was the name of the database product created by IBM?
Who created dBASE?
Why was dBASE unique?
Why was dBASE successful?
What is a benefit of using dBASE?
In the 1990s, what type of programming changed the handling of databases?
What term is used for the difficulty in database table and programmed object translation?
How is the problem of object-relational impedance mismatch corrected?
What is the library programmers use to solve object-relational impedance mismatch?
What kind of database is XML?
Where are XML databases frequently used?
What type of processing is used in enterprise database software?
How is XML used in enterprise database management?
What is used to offer a balance in guarantees?
What explains the difficulty in a system containing availability, consistency, and partition tolerance guarantees?
How many guarantees will most databases tolerate?
What should a conceptual data model do?
What makes a successful data model?
Asking questions about an organization's needs will help to create what?
What must one understand in order to create a successful data model?
A conceptual data model in separate from the choice of what?
In what form is the output of a logical database design?
Which data model is displayed as a specific model that uses DBMS?
What decisions must be made in the last stage of database design?
What is an important goal in in this final stage?
What factor is reflected in performance requirements?
How many conceptual or physical views of data are there?
How many different external views of data are there?
What is the benefit of external views of data?
What does the conceptual view offer?
How does the conceptual view handle how data is managed?
What type of view does the conceptual view offer?
What is responsible for putting information into permanent storage?
What do database administrators closely monitor?
What is database storage?
While working, does DBMS store information in one place?
What are huge quantities of information stored as?
What does database access limit?
What are examples of database objects?
Who sets database access?
What does data security avoid?
What is a subset of a database called that can be accessed by using a password?
What is possible when a DBMS interrogate and update a database?
What is a unit of work called in a database?
Are transactions limited?
How can database transactions ensure accuracy after a crash?
Why would someone attempt to unite two different databases?
In order to merge, what must the database maintain?
What are the important parts of the database related application that should be moved?
How can a DBMS database migration be made easier?
Can a DBMS be transfered to a different DBMS?
Name a reason to take a database backward in time?
Is each database backup kept in the same file?
Who can restore a database that has been corrupted?
What parameter is requiret to restore a database?
How can static analysis be useful with query languages?
What do query languages support in abstract interpretation frameworks?
What is a security measure that uses a relational database system?
Can query languages be adjusted?
Who are Windows main operating system competitors?
What new security features does Windows 8 have?
What USB version is Windows 8 compatible with?
What services does the Windows Store provide?
What can be found on the Start screen?
What about Windows 8 was well received?
What were the perceived problems with the new Windows 8 user interface?
How many Windows 8 licenses were purchased by January 2013?
Who is Windows division president?
When did Microsoft start creating Windows 8?
What is jupiter?
Where were the Windows 8 plans initially announced?
Who is Microsofts CEO?
What does BSoD stand for?
When was Milestone 1 divulged?
What was special about Milestone 1?
When was Milestone 2 divulged?
When was Build 7959 divulged?
What 3 versions of the build did Microsoft first release?
What developer tools did the build have?
How many downloads occured in the first 12 hours?
When did the developer preview expire?
When was the Developer preview initially intended to expire?
When was the beta version of Windows 8 made available to the public?
Who is the Windows Manager?
How many things were altered after developer version release?
How many times was the Consumer Preview downloaded in the first 24 hours?
When was the Consumer Preview set to expire?
When was the Release Preview revealed to consumers?
When was the release preview set to expire?
What were the main components of the Release preview?
What was the build number of the Windows 8 Release Preview?
When was the Windows 8 Release Preview accidentally revealed?
When did Windows 8 manufacturing begin?
When was Microsoft supposed to officially launch Windows 8?
What was the final build Microsoft decided to manufacture?
When were Software Assurance consumers allowed access to Windows 8?
What version of Windows 8 is Enterprise N?
How many things did Microsoft alter after Release Preview?
When was the General Availablity Cumulative Update provided?
How are system improvements released through Windows 8?
What name did Windows Explorer change to?
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 8?
How much money was allocated to advertise Windows 95?
What is the name of the character Microsoft used to make Windows 8 seem more personable?
When did Microsoft begin promoting Windows 8?
How many pop up stores did Microsoft set up to help promote Windows 8?
When was the first game of the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals?
Who did Windows 8 mock in their television campaign?
What was the name of the Windows 8 advertising campaign?
What three things did the Windows Everywhere campaign emphasize on?
What happens during Hybrid Boot mode?
What are the benefits of USB 3.0?
What is the point of near field communications?
What is Windows to Go?
What features were added to the lock screen?
What replaced the Windows Explorer comman bar?
What is the new name of Windows Explorer?
What does file history make possible?
What did the update of operation dalog boxes help with?
What is the point of using different colors on a heat map?
What changes were made to the BSoD?
What are some of the process type groups Windows 8 implemented?
How can users find out more about obscure Windows 8 processes?
What new security features did Windows 8 provide?
What were the new security features in Windows 8 geared at?
What options do Parental controls provide?
What new recovery options did Windows 8 implement?
When was the first Windows 8 patch sent out?
How does secure boot help avert boot process infections?
What requirements do Microsoft certified devices have?
What must always be enable in ARM-based Windows RT devices?
What is SkyDrive?
When was Facebook support turned off?
What features does Xbox Live hub offer?
What Xbox apps were bundled together?
What service options does Windows online now offer?
What forms is Internet Exploer 10 available as?
What limitations were put on Adobe flash to begin with?
Where can Adobe Flash now be used?
What improvements were made to Internet Explorer?
What does airplone mode do?
Where can Carrier account management systems be found?
What are some connection settings in Windows 8?
What registers the insertion of a SIM card?
Who is Jensen Harris?
What apps can one expect the People app to match with?
What apps can one expect the Photos app to match with?
What makes Windows Store apps unique?
What are contracts?
What programming languages does Windows Runtime work with?
What makes Windows apps binary code compatible?
What does compiling components as Windows Runtime make possible?
What kind of environment provides Windows apps extra security?
Where can Windows 8 install apps from?
How do devices with Windows 8 Enterprise attain apps outside of the Windows Store?
What other devices can sideload apps?
What does immersive app stand for?
What are apps after the introduction of Windows 8 called?
Who is Soma Somasegar?
When did Windows Store apps become the real term for the apps?
What code did Windows 8 change to?
What term did Microsoft give to its exception privilige for web browsing?
What different options did the desktop version have?
Which two browsers promised to develop Metro-style versions of their browsers?
What does Chromes version for Windows 8 do?
What does Firefox's version for Windows 8 do?
When was Firefox's version of Windows 8 made accesible?
What is found on the Start Screen?
What do live tiles do?
What is the primary function of the PC Settings app? 
Where can advanced settings options be found?
What is the new System User interface built on?
What is charms?
What is the purpose of charms?
How is an active list of apps accessed?
What does swiping from the left edge of the screen do?
How is the traditional desktop evironment opened?
Why was the ability to play DVD-Video taken off of Windows Media Player?
What does the Pro Pack do?
Which main feature was removed in Windows 8?
What backup element is still found on Windows 8?
How is Backup and Restore opened?
What does :76 Shadow Copy do?
What is :74 used for? 
Why did Microsoft decrease the required resoultion for tablets?
What is a convertible form factor? 
How does a convertible become a tablet?
What did Microsoft change the tablet resolution requirements on March 12, 2013?
How many Windows 8 editions are there?
What extras does Windows 8 Pro have?
What extras do Windows 8 Enterprise have?
How would one get Windows RT?
During it's launch how much was a Windows 8 upgrade?
What is the Windows 8 price?
What is the Windows 8 Pro price?
Which PC owners could purchase a Windows 8 Pro uprgrade for $14.99?
How much was the Windows Media Center add-on during the original Windows 8 promotion?
What restrictions do Windows upgrade licenses have?
What did Windows offer in place of a full version of the software?
What did the System Builder SKU take the place of?
What does OEM stand for?
What did the Personal Use License allow?
What replaced Windows 8?
What is the primary difference in Windows 8.1? 
What exemption was removed from Windows 8.1?
What is Windows 8.1 with Bing?
What architecture types does Windows 8 support?
What is 16-bit support intended for?
When was x86 2nd generation created?
How does the online Windows installer know which version to install?
What Windows version is compatible with ARM processors?
What apps work on Windows RT?
Why does Windows RT only work with apps included with the system?
Who condemned Microsoft for requiring devices to have secure boot enabled by default?
What resolution did Microsoft come to in their certificiation guidelines?
Who is Tony Mangefeste?
What ideology does Microsoft follow?
Who criticized Microsofts closed platform Windows Store?
Who created Minecraft?
Who developed Steam?
What company is Rob Pardo associated with?
What was the main reasoning behind the creation of the Windows Store?
Who equated windos 8 as the first desktop operating system that understand what a computer is supposed to do?
Why did Pierce give the Start Screen such glowing reviews?
Which improvements were most well regarded?
Who else uses a closed distribution platform?
What makes the Windows 8 interface difficult to use?
Who said the Windows 8 interface was clumsy and impractical?
What kind of feedback has Windows 8 received?
What is IDC?
What is the decline in PC sales attributed to?
How much of a decrease in sales have Windows devices experienced?
While Windows sales went down, which company experienced an increase in sales?
What percent of tablets were running Windows in Q1 2013/
What was Androids market share in 2013?
What was teh iOS market share in 2013?
What does Strategy Analytics say Windows tablets are lacking?
When did Windows 8 surpass Windows Vistas market share?
What changes did Microsoft make to its certification requirements in March 2013?
Why did Microsoft change the tablet resolution minimum? 
How many licenses did Microsoft sell in the first six months?
What controlled the small form tablet market at this time?
When did Microsoft make the existence of Windows 8.1 with Bing OEM SKU official?
When did Microsoft remove license fees on device screens less than 9 inches?
When did Windows 8 decrease the price of Windows 8 for devices that cost less than $250?
What was the benefit of Windows 8.1 with Bing?
When did the Chinese government ban the purchase of Windows 8 products?
Why did the Chinese government ban Windows 8 based products?
What market share did Windows XP have in Chine?
Who claimed that the Windows 8 would allow the US Government to spy on its users?
What does CCTV stand for?
What is the name of the Chinese social network?
Who claimed that the Window 8 OS could gather sensitive user information?
Where did Yang Min practice as a computer scientiest?
When was Windows 8.1 introduced?
When did Microsoft release the beta version of Windows 8.1?
When did MSDN and TechNet users gain access to Windows 8.1?
What search engine was added in Windows 8.1?
How did the Windows 8.1 upgrade enhance desktop startup?
What main feature was added back to the desktop?
How many apps did the WIndows 8.1 update allow to be snapped onto a signular display?
What is the USAF?
How many uniformed services are there in the United States?
When did the USAF split from the US Army?
What act formed the USAF?
What is one of the functions of the USAF?
How many departments are there in the Department of Defense?
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force currently report to? 
What branch of the government must confirm the President's appointment of the Secretary of the Air Force? 
Who serves as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff?
Who assigns combat missions to the Air Force? 
How many core functions did the Air Force reduce its duties down to recently? 
What do these core functions of the Air Force express? 
What are not considered doctrinal constructs of the Air Force? 
What is the mission set of the Air Force called that includes nuclear strike operations? 
How does the Air Force promote security to its allies? 
What is the US Air Force prepared to do to support its allies? 
What do potential adversaries threaten that the US Air Force prevents? 
What is the definition of a nuclear strike? 
What action by the US Air Force would deter adversaries from threatening US Security? 
Who has the authorization in the US to terminate a conflict?
What organization does the US Air Force support on its missions? 
What is one of the areas where the US Air Force might operate its missions? 
What ensures the safety of nuclear operations? 
What is the mission of the NDO in regards to nuclear security? 
What is a Broken Arrow incident in nuclear security? 
What is one of the five functions of NDO support? 
What other US departments does the Air Force coordinate with for nuclear security? 
What does the abbreviation OCA stand for? 
What is the function or definition of the OCA according to JP 1-02?
OCA is the preferred method of defeating what kind of attacks? 
What is one of the important functions of the OCA in dealing with attacks? 
What does the abbreviation DCA stand for? 
What sort of airspace is the DCA designed to protect?
What is active defense, according to the functions of the DCA? 
What kind of missile defense does active defense protect against, according to the DCA?
What is one of the many ways the DCA utilizes passive defense to protect from enemy attacks? 
What is the dominance in space of one force over another? 
What does Space Superiority encompass? 
Who does space superiority ensure freedom of action in space for? 
What areas does Space Superiority operate in? 
What is the definition of Space Control according to the US and its allies? 
What is one of the areas of operation that space control serves to protect? 
What is the operational environment that Space Control depends on? 
Who responds with the employment of capabilities where there is a threat?
What is the definition of CND?
What does Cyberspace defense include?
What is one of the things that Cyberspace defense highly dependent on? 
What branch of the military is in charge of Cyberspace defense? 
What division ensures the Air Force's information integrity and availability? 
What is ability is critical in Cyberspace Supports mission?
What important networks is it the function of Cyberspace support to protect?
What techniques does the Cyberspace Support branch of the Air Force use? 
What is the definition of Command and Control in the Air Force operations? 
Who is in charge of the Command and Control operations? 
What is one of the C2 related functions that the Command and Control mission of the Air Force uses? 
What are the main objectives of the Command and Control initiative? 
What agency is in charge of intelligence requirements? 
What is one of the ways that the Air Force uses Planning and Directing in its operations? 
Who benefits from the process analysis and dissemination of this information? 
What are Special Operations? 
What are the goals of Special Operations? 
What kind of forces can Special Operations missions employ? 
What is one of the ways that Special Operations is different from conventional methods?
What is the definition of Airlift according to the Air Mobility Operations? 
What objectives does Airlift support? 
What does this US presence represent during a humanitarian crisis? 
How does the US employ the global reach capability of airlift? 
Who coordinates the deployment of thee Aeromedical Evacuation? 
What is the movement of patients who need medical attention called?
Where does the Aeromedical Evacuation team transport casualties? 
Who operates and is able to conduct airland missions? 
What does the abbreviation PR stand for in terms of the US military?
What is the definition of a Personnel Recovery mission? 
What is one of the ways that PR uses its capabilities in a crisis? 
What are the types of international duties of the PR mission? 
What are programs that are designed to help with natural or manmade disaters? 
What kind of Humanitarian assistance is supplied by the US Forces?
What kinds of endemic conditions do the Human Assistance Operations entail? 
Who is the Humanitarian support intended to help? 
What does Building Partnerships relate to in the Air Force? 
What are the goals of the Building Partnership interactions?
What sort of inter-personal relationships does Building Partnerships encourage? 
What is the major goal of Building Partnerships in these deeds and actions?
What are Airmen expected to be competent in for these Building Partnerships missions?
Who created the first version of the US Air Force in 1907?
When did the US Air Force separate from the War Department? 
How many causalities did the US Air Force suffer during WWII? 
What does the USAAF stand for? 
Who signed the National Security Act of 1947? 
What was the National Military Establishment renamed in 1949?
How many subordinate divisions did the National Military Establishment contain?
What does the US Navy's responsibilities include?
Who is in charge of closed air support of infantry operations? 
What American broke the sound barrier in 1947?
When did the USAF have several missteps of aircraft procurement projects? 
Who wrote that these aircraft procurement projects were a failure of intellect and ethics?
When were the military leaders replaced after a scandal over failure to maintain its nuclear arsenal? 
What did the USAF strive to improve since 2005?
What is the deployment phase of BMT called? 
What other training do the US Air force Personnel get during BMT? 
Who acts as a mentor during this deployment phase of the BMT?
What year did the USAF take a Reduction-in-force?
Why did the USAF plan to take a reduction-in-force?
How many USAF personnel did the reduction end in during 2008?
What has there been a sharp reduction in during the years following 2005 in the USAF?
Who was Robert Gates? 
What Secretary of the Air Force resigned in 2008?
Where did the US Air Force accidentally ship a component of Nuclear Weapons? 
What US Chief of Staff of the US Air Force also resigned in June of 2008?
When was the Air Force Global Strike Command formed?
Why was the USAF forced to ground some of its squadrons in 2013?
Who was the Commander of Air Combat Command in 2013?
Why have many US Air Force pilots opted to resign from active service? 
Where have many of these US Air Force pilots chosen to find employment instead? 
What is one of the concerns of the Air Force? 
How did the USAF try to make these adjustments to help with strength and readiness of its fleet? 
How much money did Congress give to the USAF to enable them to replace some of the grounded fleet? 
Who is the Department of the Air Force managed by?
Who does the Secretary of the Air Force report to?
Who appoints the top positions in the USAF, including the Assistant Secretaries and General Council?
Upon whom does the President call on for support in his appointments to the USAF?
Who does the senior leadership roles in the USAF include? 
Who directs the Secretary of the Air Force during operational missions? 
What does the abbreviation CHOP stand for? 
Who does the AMC forces usually retain their componency to?
Who is in charge of these Change in Operational Control missions? 
What are "Chopped" units called in the USAF?
What is the top level structure of these Chopped forces in the USAF? 
What does the C-NAF provide support to?
Who does the C-NAFF coordinate with on ACEE missions?
What kind of AFSC is a JAG?
What is one of the many types of AFSC employed by the USAF? 
What is an example of an occupational field position in the USAF?
What does the abbreviation EOD stand for in the USAF?
What is one of the most dangerous jobs for USAF personnel?
What do some of these special missions in the USAF who deploy with the infantry do?
What are these enlisted positions in the USAF complimented by?
What other career fields have seen an increase in active combat missions? 
How long is the training for Explosive Ordnance Disposal in the USAF?
What USAF tech school has 31 days of training?
Who conducts the training for Technical Officers in the USAF?
How long does the flight training for the AETC's Nineteenth Air Force last? 
What groups is the USAF rank divided amoung? 
How are Enlisted promotions in the USAF decided? 
How are Officer promotions within the USAF decided?
How is a Commissioned Officer's rank shown?
Was does ROPMA stand for in the USAF? 
What are Air Force Officer promotions overseen by?
How long does it usually take to be promoted from second to first lieutenant in the USAF? 
Who establishes limits on the amount of Air Force officers? 
What promotion in the USAF is governed by a formal selection process?
Where is an officer's record in the USAF reviewed for a promotion?
What state is the Randolph Air Force Base located in? 
When does promotion from major to lieutenant colonel in the USAF typically occur?
The promotion process repeats when for officers promoted early in the USAF?
What section in the US Code for the Secretary of the Air Force allows for the appointment of warrant officers?
When did the USAF inherit warrant officer ranks from the Army?
When did Congress authorize the creation of two new senior officer grades?
When did the USAF stop appointing warrant officers?
What is the newest top enlisted grade in the USAF?
What is the lowest pay grade in the USAF?
What is the highest pay grade in the USAF?
What pay grades are included in the USAF for Senior NCOs?
What does junior NCO refer to in the USAF pay grade system?
When does NCO status happen in all other branches of the US Military?
When does NCO status occur in the USAF?
What must a Senior Airman do to become a supervisor in the USAF?
What rank is NCO status achieved in the US Army?
Where was the Uxbridge Blue dress uniform developed?
When was the first USAF dress uniform introduced?
When was the current USAF dress uniform standardized? 
Where does an officer in the USAF wear their rank insignia? 
What is worn by USAF members to indicate a billet assignment? 
What else can Badges be used to designate in the USAF? 
What is one of the types of Authorized Badges in the USAF? 
When is the special "pocket rocket" badge given to USAF personnel working in a missile system operation? 
USAF Officers can be commissioned after graduation from what school? 
What is another program that allows officers to become commissioned in the USAF?
Where is the OTS in the US currently located?
What is a line officer in the USAF? 
How many commissioning programs does the OTS offer the USAF?
What does the Air Force provide for officers of direct to non-line positions?
What fields of study in the COT are included in this area of the USAF? 
What is an example of the coursework now offered in the COT in the USAF? 
What is the more strict program that the USAF adopted in 2010 called?
What test is designed to test the fitness of airmen in the USAF? 
How long is the run that the USAF airmen are tested on for the fitness program? 
What is a passing score on the US Air Force Fitness Test? 
What score must an airman get on the US Air Force Fitness test to be able to opt out of one of the mandatory twice a year retests? 
What are the ground-attack aircraft in the USAF usually deployed in support for? 
What does the closeness to friendly troops require of these US Air Force aircraft?
What part of a battle line are the precision strike aircraft of the USAF deployed?
What type of aircraft is not appropriate to be used in close proximity of US ground troops? 
What are most attack aircraft in the US Air Force designed to do? 
What type of USAF aircraft is designed for long range airstrike attacks? 
What types of aircraft are typically limited to close proximity of battlefield conflict by the USAF? 
What increases the radius of combat missions by the US Air Force?
What countries utilize strategic bomber aircraft in their missions? 
When did the B-2A aircraft enter into service of the US Air Force? 
When did the USAF introduce the B-1B aircraft? 
What aircraft in the USAF was introduced in the 1960s?
How long is the B-52H scheduled to remain in service of the USAF? 
What aircraft is scheduled to replace the B-52 in the USAF?
What type of aircraft is used to deliver troops and weapons to military operations? 
What aircraft are considered the workhorses of the US Air Force?
The CV-22 aircraft is used by what section of the USAF?
What aircraft offers Antarctic Support to the US Air Force?
What did the USAF use the WC-130H aircraft for before they converted them for transport missions? 
What is the purpose of electronic warfare?
What nickname is given to Electronic warfare aircraft?
What does the USAF use Electronic warfare aircraft for?
What is the EC-130H used for by the US Air Force? 
What does the USAF use the E-4B aircraft for?
What is the primary function of the USAF fighter aircraft?
What is the name of a type of dual purpose fighter-bomber aircraft used by the US Air Force?
What aircraft is used by the US Air Demonstration group The Thunderbirds?
What kind of aircraft is utilized by the USAF in Full Scale Aerial Targets?
What are the QF-4 aircraft being replaced by the US Air Force? 
What kind of aircraft is the USAF's KC-135?
How does the aerial refueling aircraft supply fuel during flight?
When is air-to-air refueling primarily used by the US Air Force?
What aircraft will be available for use by the US Air Force in 2017?
What US Secretary of Defense accepted resignations of top US Air Force officials in June of 2009?
What US Secretary of the Air Force resigned following a nuclear weapons problem ?
Who was appointed to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force following Mosley's resignation?
What newspaper reported on Schwartz's dismantlement of the US Air Force's class system?
What author wrote about the US Air Force egalitarian culture?
How does the US Air Force differ from other branches of the military?
How have the enlisted forces of the US Air Force been seen?
What is the reason for the shortage of UAV operators in the US Air Force?
During what war the the USAF establish a new career field for piloting UAVs and drones?
Why did the USAF change its training methods on UAVs in 2014?
What branch of the US Military does a cultural divide prevent the US Air Force from adopting their drone protocols?
Where did some of the US Air Force traditions come from? 
What traditions does the US Air Force have? 
What organization did the US Air Force adopt "Challenge Coins" from?
What does the roof stomp tradition signify in the US Air Force?
What was a recent US Air Force recruiting slogan? 
What does the USAF slogan Uno Ab Alto mean? 
What is the most recent US Air Force recruitment slogan in October 2010?
Where can individual each USAF wing, group or squadrons individual motto be found?
What type of atmosphere can LED lighting be used?
What is an advantage to using LED lighting over the normal light sources?
What does LED stand for?
Why are some people hesitant to use LED lighting?
What is a popular use for LED lighting?
What was the nationality of the man who discovered Electroluminescence?
LED lighting is the end result of what phenomenon?
When was Electroluminescence discovered?
Who is the Soviet man that created the first LED?
What type of detector did H.J. Round use to help him in his discovery?
What year was it discovered that early LED instruments could be used for non-radio communication?
Who discovered non-radio uses for early LED devices?
The current in non-radio communication had to go through what type of component?
What other component was needed to detect the first current of a non-radio signal?
What final device was needed to hear the signal from the initial GaAs diode?
In what state what near-infrared light emission discovered? 
What type of diode was used to help discover near-infrared light emission?
In what year was the patent filed for the Semiconductor Radiant Diode?
What was the first practical LED?
The two inventors of the first practical diode were employed by what famous company?
At what global company was the first visible-spectrum LED developed?
What GE employee developed the visible-spectrum LED?
What color is associated with the visible-spectrum LED?
What color LED was later created in 1972?
What graduate student of Holonyak created the yellow LED?
What was the first commercial uses of LEDs?
How much did the early LEDs cost?
What was one use of early LED light in products?
What modern company introduced LEDs in 1968?
In what decade were production costs greatly reduced for LEDs to enable successful commercial uses?
What color LED was demonstrated in 1994?
Who demonstrated the first blue LED?
What did Nakamura, Akasaki, and Amano receive for their work?
Who investigated the efficiency of high-brightness LED at Cardiff University in 1995?
What substance did Barbieri use in his work with high-brightness LED?
What LED quickly followed the blue LEDs?
What does the YAG phosphor coating produce?
What converts absorbed light energy into an electric current?
What is the phenomenon where a P-N junction emits light when an electrical current is applied to it?
Where are the free electrons located in the production of electroluminescence?
Whose energy levels are lower than the electrons in the electroluminescence process?
Why is some energy in the electroluminescence process emitted as heat and light?
In what year was a new type of blue LED produced?
Who demonstrated in 2003 the new type of blue LED?
How much more efficient as standard incandescents was the white LED commercially available in 2003?
What is the typical operating current for high-power LEDs?
What is a symptom of LED failure?
What is rare in LED lighting?
What was notable in early red LEDs?
What could cause early light-output degradation in LEDs?
What is a classification used in LED lighting to describe how much usefulness it will receive?
LED efficacy is inversely proportional to what?
Where is LED lighting very well suited?
LEDs produce less waste heat than what other device?
What is LED lighting more susceptible to than incandescent light?
What students developed the first blue-violet LED?
The first blue-violet LED was developed at what University?
When was the first blue-violet LED developed?
What substance helped demonstrate the first blue electroluminescence?
In what decade were breakthroughs made that brought in the modern era of GaN-based optoelectronic devices?
Who first patented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?
Who first invented a method to produce high-brightness blue LEDs?
What technology was made possible by high-power blue light sources?
What is one modern gadget that benefits from high-power blue LED lighting?
What Nobel Prize did Nakamura, Amano, and Akasaki receive in 2014?
What award did Nakamura receive in 2006 for his invention?
How many companies did a judge say infringed on Dr. Moustakas's prior blue light patent in 2015?
What was the fine given to the three companies?
What are cladding layers?
How can light emission be varied from violet to amber?
What does AlGaN stand for?
What LEDs are more efficient when produced from the InGaN/GaN systems than without?
What substance does nitrides contain?
What sort of LEDs are becoming more available on the market?
What is the range of wavelengths for cheap UV LEDs?
Shorter wavelength diodes provide wavelengths as low as what?
What UV wavelengths are found in sterilization devices?
What colors are used to form white light?
What is the method called that mixes red, green, and blue colors to form white light?
What does the multi-color white LED method need to produce the end result?
What is another name to reference the multi-color white LED method?
What is a factor that may be different in the various types of multi-color white LEDs?
Higher efficiency in multi-color white LEDs may mean what?
What is one type of multi-color white LED?
What type has the best luminous efficacy?
What luminous efficacy does trichromatic white LEDs have?
Multi-color LEDs offer what else besides the formation of white light?
What problem must be solved before multi-color LEDs can play a role in the market?
What problem results when rising temperatures decays power?
What method involves coating LEDs of one color with phosphors of different colors?
In pcLEDs method, a fraction of what light is used?
What shift does blue light undergo in the pcLEDs method?
The different colors of phosphors that can be used is based on what?
What broadens the emitted spectrum in a pcLEDs method?
What do phosphor-based LEDs luminous efficacies depend on?
What is the most popular method for making high-intensity white LEDs?
Why is efficiency sometimes lost in phosphor-based LEDs?
What are some of the luminous efficacies of yellow phosphor based white LED compared to blue?
What type of emitter is used in phosphor-based white LED methods?
What can improve the efficiency of LED-based white light?
What is the most efficient yellow phosphor?
What is the percentage of stoke shift loss in YAG phosphor?
What area are scientists looking into regarding phosphor LED development?
What is one method that can raise the efficiency of phosphor-based LEDs?
White LEDs can be made by coating what?
What are near-ultraviolet LEDs coated with to create white LED?
What device also works in a similar way as NUV LEDs?
The method of coating NUVs less efficient than what other LEDs?
What light can harm human eyes or skin?
What is being used to produce white LEDs?
What size are the wafers used to create white LEDs?
By using silicon wafers, what is being avoided?
What needs to be used to reflect light that would otherwise be wasted?
By what year will% of all GaN LEDs be made with gallium-nitride-on-silicon wafers?
What nanocrystals possess unique optical properties?
Quantum Dot LEDs can do what special skill?
The narrowing of the emission spectrum in Quantum Dot LEDs allows them to do what?
How many types of schemes are there in Quantum Dot LED excitation?
What is one scheme of Quantum Dot excitation?
What is one material used in electrical-excitation?
During the electrical-excitation scheme, what moves into the quantum dot layer?
A Quantum Dot LED has been used in what?
How many lumens can some high-power LEDs emit?
Up to how many densities have been achieved with LED power?
Why must High-power LEDs be mounted on a heat sink?
What will happen if the heat from a high-power LED is not removed?
What can one high-power LED replace?
What company has developed LEDs that can operate on AC power?
What is the efficacy of an AC powered HP-LED?
When did Seoul Semiconductor release the first high DC voltage LED?
What is so good about ac powered HP-LEDs?
What did Seoul Semiconductor name their ac powered HP-LED?
What type of LEDs are available in seven-segment format?
What is another format that Alphanumeric LEDs are available in?
Which alphanumeric LED display can display all letters?
What type of pixels does a dot matrix display use?
What has reduced the popularity of numeric LED displays?
What makes RGB LEDs different?
How are Digital-RGB LED strobe signals connected?
What object sources the data in of the first LED of a digital rgb LED?
The microprocessor does what in a digital RGB LED?
What is one example of where Digital RGB LED lights are used?
What does an LED filament consist of?
How are LED filaments used?
What type of voltage is needed for LED filaments?
What helps LED filaments remain low cost?
Single die LEDs require what?
How are LEDs similar to other diodes?
What is a solution to preventing an LED failure?
What can cause a large change in current in LEDs?
What is a constant-voltage source?
What feature do most LED fixtures need to have?
How are most LEDs classified?
What does being a Class 1 LED product mean?
What type of LED can possibly cause blindness?
Which government advocated the banning of Class 2 LEDs?
What class are extremely bright LEDs listed as?
What dangerous metal can LEDs contain?
What substance does fluorescent lamps contain?
Which LEDs are considered dangerous by a 2011 study?
According to a California study, what harmful metal is in most LEDs?
What LEDs are considered safer than any other?
What type of light is ideal for traffic signals?
In what year were luminescence standards set?
What color LEDs are used when night vision is important?
What is an example of a night vision needed area?
What is another use for one-color light?
Because of their high output, LED lights are very useful where?
Why are LED lights sought after for various applications?
LED brake lights are how many times faster than incandescent ones?
What color LEDs are now starting to be used more?
What types of light can LEDs form better than incandescent?
Where are infrared LEDs used in everday life?
How are LEDs used in theaters?
LEDs can send data over what type of cable?
What type of fiber forms the backbone of the internet?
In what country does one kilowatt-hour of electricity causes 1.34 pounds of CO 2 emission?
How much CO2 emission would a 40-watt light bulb produce after 10 hours?
A 6-watt LED left on for 10 hours a day will emit how much CO 2?
How much can a building's carbon footprint be reduced by switching to LEDs?
LEDs are often used for what type of systems?
Why are LEDs preferred for machine vision systems?
What can help make LEDs more widely used?
What is the most common example of a machine vision system?
Where are some LEDs in machine vision systems found?
Where are LEDs often used?
Where are opto-isolators found?
What is an example of a device that uses free space optic communications?
What does an optoisolator do?
In what common household item can you find infrared LEDs?
What video game console uses infrared LEDs?
What device uses infrared LEDs to measure oxygen saturation?
Some flatbed scanners use what type of LED?
By using LEDs, scanners do not have to what?
Grow lights use LEDs for what process?
What quality has LEDs been used as?
What LED has the flattest I/V curve above the knee?
What LEDs have a very steep I/V curve?
LED forward voltage is more current-dependent than what diode?
Zener diodes below what voltage are not widely available?
Where is Youtube headquartered? 
When was Youtube created?
How much did Google pay for Youtube in 2006?
Other than video blogging and and educational videos, what content is available on youtube?
How does youtube now operate as a business?
What are the first names of the men that invented youtube?
Where did Chen live in 2005?
What was the original stimuli for creating the website?
When did the creators have the idea for youtube?
when was the first beta test for the youtube site?
What was the first video to reach a million views?
How much did Sequoia Capital invest in youtube in November of 2005?
What was the official launch date for the youtube website?
As of May 2010 how many total video views had youtube attained?
As of 2014, how many hours of video were being uploaded every  minute?
How much content on youtube comes from outside the US?
How many unique visitors a month were tracked as of 2014?
As of June 2015, how many estimated visitors does youtube have in a month?
Youtube is ranked what on the world's list of most visited sites?
What did youtube do on March 31 2010? 
Who was the Google product manager in 2010?
How many videos was youtube serving per day as of May 2010?
How many views per day was youtube receiving as of May 2011?
How many videos per day were streamed as of January 2012?
What did youtube announce in Feb of 2015?
what was the name of the new app youtube launched?
What platform was launched in Aug of 2015?
What is the name of the youtube feature that removes ads and allows downloading movies?
On what OS was the YouTube Kids app available?
In 2010 youtube launched a version of its site that ran on what standard?
What was the main benefit from the switch to HTML5?
How did users opt into the trial version of youtube's HTML5 site?
What format besides H.264 was playable with HTML5?
What is the maximum length of a video on youtube?
When a user with a new account posts a video, what is the maximum length allowed?
When was the time limit on video length first enacted on youtube?
in 2006 Youtube found that the majority of longer videos were what?
What is the upload file size limit on out of date browsers?
When was 720p HD support added to youtube?
What did youtube change its screen format to from 4:3?
What video format support was added in 2009?
What is the highest resolution of video supported by youtube?
What is the name of the format that has dimensions of 40963072 pixels?
Peter Bradshaw held what position in youtube?
What type of videos did youtube officially start supporting in July 2009?
What is the name for the common method of viewing a 3d movie, with red and blue glasses?
When did HTML5 officially support side-by-side 3D footage?
Youtube offers users the option to watch content where?
What is used to embed a youtube video to a webpage?
What is the most common use of embedded youtube videos?
What is a video called when a person records themselves watching a different video?
When did youtube officially remove the response feature?
YOutube does not often post a what for its videos?
Youtube intends for users to watch videos where?
What was added to the upload options in July of 2012?
Which site removed the option of downloading youtube videos after 2012?
Which videos are often available for download straight from youtube?
When did youtube become available on Apple products?
When did youtube launch its first app for the iPhone?
What percentage of Smartphone users use the youtube app?
What is Apple's prefered video standard?
How long did it take to transfer Youtube's content to Apple's standard?
What service was able to search and play youtube videos as of 2008?
What did youtube launch in Jan of 2009?
later in 2009 what service replaced youtube for TV
Google made youtube streamable on what gaming console in DEC. of 2013?
When did youtube finally become available on the Playstation 4?
What is youtube red?
When was youtube red originally announced?
What was the original title of youtube red?
When was youtube red re-launched with its added features?
What service was "music key" intended to replace?
Other than private individuals, who has used youtube to grow their audience?
What is the name of youtube's revenue-sharing program?
What was the highest earning youtube partner video producer?
Big pop artists account for how what percentage of the views on youtube?
Which music chart said in 2013 it would start taking youtube data into account for its ratings?
Who is the TED curator?
What surprising feature does youtube possibly have the chance to revolutionize? 
Who is the founder of the Khan Academy?
What other surprising aspect of human development will youtube likely have an impact on?
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using Facebook to what?
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using Twitter to do what?
An activist in the Arab spring said they were using youtube to do what?
Who was the co-sponsor of the condemnation by the US Senate over the kony 2012 video?
What year was the first youtube question asked to a presidential nominee?
How has youtube helped the government?
the white house's youtube channel was the what number ranked news channel on youtube in 2012?
What was deemed necessary by the white house when creating youtube content?
In 2013 who did the healthcare exchange commission to impersonate Obama and post it to youtube?
What was the purpose of Iman Crosson's video?
What is the name of the group that drew responses from the resident and most of his staff regarding anti-bullying?
How old was Amanda Todd when she took her own life because of bullying?
How ling did it take the It Gets Better Project video to draw such a huge response?
What was done after Amanda Todd's death?
What was the goal of the actions taken after Amanda Todd's death?
How much time does the average person spend watching youtube videos each day?
What is the average time an American watches TV in day?
What was youtube's estimated ads revenue in 2013?
What was youtube's revenue as estimated in 2008?
Youtube's financial records are not reported by who?
When did youtube enter a partnership with NBC?
What is the name of the section in youtube that allows major content publishers to post full length movies and episodes?
What was the intended purpose of youtube's "shows" section?
When did youtube launch the version of "shows" for the UK?
In 2010 how many movies did youtube's rental service offer?
What was youtube's 2007 partner program based on?
What percentage of revenue does youtube get for ads on "partner program" channels?
How many people are employed by the partner program?
As per estimate in 2013 how much would a partner program member earn with ad revenue off of pre-roll advertising per 1000 views?
How much ad revenue goes to the original uploader of the youtube video if they're in the partner program?
Where does the majority of youtube's revenue go?
In 2010 what were the estimates for the amount of videos with advertisements uploaded without the copywriter's consent?
Which major gaming company claimed copyright ad revenue rights against uploaders?
When did Nintendo finally agree to share ad profits with the original uploaders?
What option besides removing the video does youtube grant copyright holders?
What does the message when uploading a video ask the user not to do?
Posting a video without consent of the copyright holder is what according to youtube?
How many copyright infringements must an account have before the account is deleted?
Youtube doesn't do what to videos before they're posted?
What kind of notice must a copyright holder issue when trying to take down content?
How much did Viacom want in damages in their lawsuit against youtube?
Companies including Viacom and Mediaset have done what against youtube?
What does youtube do to prevent losing lawsuits involving copyright infringement?
How many unauthorized clips did Viacom allegedly find on youtube that infringed its copyrights?
How much data did youtube have to hand over to Viacom as a result of the lawsuit?
Which organization spoke against the courts ruling?
What did Viacom plan to do after the ruling in 2010?
What happened to Viacom's lawsuit in 2010?
Who was the residing judge of the lawsuit?
In 2007 youtube launched an automated system to detect what?
Who was Google's CEO in 2007?
What is the name of the system that automatically detects copyright violations?
Why did the CEO of Google think the new software was necessary? 
What does Content ID do if an upload is too close a match to a known copyright material?
What was the ultimate view of Content ID's performance after a 2009 test?
As of 2010 what is the maximum length of a video a user can upload given the proper authority?
How does one dispute the ruling of Content ID?
What happened to the sites rules in Dec. 2010?
Youtube depends on who to flag inappropriate videos?
Who checks the flagged videos for unauthorized content?
Who of the house of commons spoke out on youtube's policies?
The United Kingdom stated it was what with youtube's policies with moderating its content?
When did the UK speak out against youtube's copyright policies?
Most videos enable users to do what
What has attracted negative attention about comments on youtube besides their content?
Time in 2006 wrote that youtube harnessed the wisdom and what else of humanity?
Which magazine wrote about youtube in a 2009 article on user comments?
Some of the positive aspects of youtube might be that it provides what on a scale we've never seen before?
When did youtube first require the user to have a google account before posting a comment?
The changes to the google+ additions allowed uploaders to better moderate and what to comments?
There were better sorting functions put in place in 2013 to make sure what kind of comments appeared on top?
What is youtube co-founder Karim's first name?
How many thumbs down votes did youtube's official statement about the new commenting system get within two days?
youtube is completely what in some places?
Why besides limited periods of time would youtube not be allowed in a country?
What might happen in a restrictive state even if you do have access to the youtube site itself?
How many independent labels did the Merlin Network represent?
What was the percentage of labels youtube had signed contracts with prior to the planned launch date?
What was youtube planning on doing to labels it did not reach a deal with?
Which journalistic organization released the reports of youtube's agreement with the Merlin Network?
Why did youtube want to ensure only contractees music was played?
What does the state want a police force to do?
What are gendarmerie?
What are police usually separate from?
How are police usually paid?
When were police used to protect the class system?
What kind of service are police?
What problem do many police forces have?
How are police usually paid?
What kind of service are police?
When were police used to protect the class system?
What problem do many police forces have?
Which Chinese kingdoms developed law enforcement?
What period was the Chu kingdom in?
What period was the Jin kingdom in?
Which countries adopted the 'prefecture system' from China?
What did ancient China call its police?
What war ended in 1479?
Who formed Spain's first national police force?
What was Spain's first national police force called, in Spanish?
What does Santa Hermandad mean?
When did Spain suppress local police units?
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?
What was the Marshal's force called?
What was the Constable's force called, in English?
What was the Constable's force called, in French?
Which two entities in Medieval France had police duties?
How were the Marshal and Constable of France formally classified?
What was the Marshal's force called?
What was the Constable's force called, in English?
What was the Constable's force called, in French?
In what year did Paris get a police force?
Who created Paris's police force?
What was the largest European city in 1667?
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in English?
What was the title of the head of Paris's police, in French?
Who was Paris's first head of police?
How many commissioners worked under Reynie?
How many policing districts was Paris divided into?
When was Paris's police system expanded to the rest of France?
When were police inspectors added to Paris's police?
When did the French language adopt the word 'police'?
Which dictionary said police were 'a symbol of foreign oppression'?
What language did French borrow the word 'police' from?
When were the Marine Police created in the UK?
What was the first use of 'police' in the UK?
Who convinced the West Indies merchants in London to establish police?
Where did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?
When did the West Indies merchants in London create a police force?
How much cargo had been being stolen from West Indies merchants in London each year?
How did Colquhoun praise the French police?
What was the initial size of the Thames River Police force?
How many dock workers were the Thames River Police policing?
How many dock workers did Colquhoun say were criminals?
When was the Thames River Police made a public service?
How much cargo theft did the Thames River Police prevent in its first year?
How did the Bow Street group pay their employees?
Who started the Bow Street detectives?
Who came up with the concept of the 'new' police?
How did the Thames River Police pay their employees?
What schedule did the Thames River Police employees work?
Which law established Glasgow's police?
When was Glasgow's police force established?
Which law established Ireland's police?
When was Ireland's police force established?
What was Ireland's police force called?
Who was the 'father of modern policing'?
Whose philosophy influenced Peel?
What political position did Bentham think police should have?
How did Peel standardize police?
How did Peel organize police?
When was the Metropolitan Police Act passed?
What did the Metropolitan Police Act say police were a subset of?
Where was the 'Continental model' of police from?
What part of the government did French police work under?
When did Rio get its first police investigator?
How had the Rio police grown by the 17th century?
When did Minas Gerais get a cavalry regiment?
Where did the Portuguese royal family move in 1808?
Who invaded Portugal in 1808?
When did Canada get its first police?
What was Canada's first police force?
When was the Toronto police created?
When was the Montreal police created?
When were the first Mounties created?
What were the Old West's local police options?
Which military branch helped the Old West's inadequate local police?
Which military branch did the Pinkertons exceed at their height?
Which private contractor acted as police for businesses?
Which countries' scholars developed the contemporary police concept?
When was the 'Treatise on the Police' published?
What was the 'Treatise on the Police' called in French?
Who wrote the 'Treatise on the Police'?
What was von Hornigk's career?
Which economic theory did Foucault say supported the police?
How did Foucault describe the social duty of police?
Who wrote about Polizeiwissenschaft?
Why did the functions of police grow beyond law enforcement to urban planning?
Who wrote 'Preventive Police'?
When was 'Preventive Police' published?
Where was 'Preventive Police' published?
What did Chadwick say police should be focused on?
What was the alternative to prevention?
What do some police departments make detectives go back to periodically?
Where do some think the most important police work happens?
How do patrol officers affect crime?
When did Nadelmann write about global policing?
When did Sheptycki write about global policing?
What terms have been used to describe policing beyond one country?
When did Deflem write about cross-border policing?
What groups did European police work against across borders in the 19th century?
Which police force monitored Karl Marx?
What international police agency was created before WW2?
In what era did cross-border policing increase?
Where did Sheptycki study police cooperation?
When did Sheptycki write about police cooperation?
When did the Channel region establish routine cross-border policing?
When was the Schengen Treaty signed?
What did the Schengen Treaty do for policing?
Where has cross-border policing been most under-studied?
Who compared transnational police information and intelligence sharing practices?
What kind of policing has become common practice?
What problems did Sheptycki say 'organizational pathologies' have caused for police?
What paradox did Sheptycki point out?
Where has transnational policing become more important?
Who wrote about police development-aid in 2007?
What kind of countries get assistance with policing?
What concern did Hills raise about power imbalances?
What concern did Hills raise about police models?
Who wrote the Global Accountability Report for 2007?
Why is transnational policing so unaccountable?
How accountable is Interpol?
What is the least-accountable IGO?
What should non-lethal weapons properly be called?
What are common less-lethal weapons?
What is supposed to be the last resort for police?
What is South Africa's "shoot-to-kill" policy?
Where can police shoot fleeing convicts?
How do modern police often communicate?
Where do police have radios?
Why do police use radios?
What have computers in police cars enabled for investigation?
What have computers in police cars enabled for reporting?
When do police often use unmarked cars?
What use of unmarked cars is controversial?
Why did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?
When did New York State ban unmarked cars for traffic cops?
Why do some cops use bicycles to patrol?
How do bicycles help catch some suspects?
What do police use to control motorcyclist events?
Who was O.W. Wilson a student of?
Who introduced education requirements for US police?
Why did Wilson rotate officers between communities?
Where did Wilson reduce police corruption?
How did Wilson recruit more qualified police?
What does Miranda provide?
What does the 5th Amendment protect against?
Which amendment prevents self-incrimination?
When was the Terry v. Ohio case?
Which two parts did Terry v. Ohio divide seizure into?
What is an investigatory stop's search limited to?
What is the legal status of UK police officers?
What can only Inspector-ranked UK officers do?
What can only Superintendent-ranked UK officers do?
What powers of a new UK police officer are the same as a Commissioner's?
Why do some police acts limit when police can interfere without court orders?
What could be impeded without police interference?
How could police help the owner when a restaurant guest doesn't pay because their wallet got stolen?
